<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>
<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
                

## City of Mountain View
## Agenda
## Rental Housing Committee

### Comittee Members Grunewald, Means, Ramos, Vice Chair Ortiz, Chair Honey, and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

Monday, May 22, 2017  
8:00 PM  
Council Chambers  

***

1. CALL TO ORDER - Welcome and Introductions  

2. ROLL CALL

3. MINUTES APPROVAL  
    1. Approval of Minutes  
	Recommendation: Approve the minutes for May 8, 2017 RHC Meeting  
	Copies of the minutes for the above-noted meetings have been delivered to Committee Members and copies are available at City Hall.  If there are no corrections or additions, a motion is in order to approve these minutes.  
	Attachments: [Minutes for May 8, 2017](../minutes/05082017) 

4. ORAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PUBLIC  
This portion of the meeting is reserved for persons wishing to address the Commission on any matter not on the agenda.  Speakers are limited to three minutes.  State law prohibits the Commission from acting on non-agenda items.

5. PUBLIC HEARING - None

6. UNFINISHED BUSINESS - None

7.  NEW BUSINESS  
      1. Adopt Annual General Adjustment of Rent for 2017  
	  Recommendation: Consider a resolution adopting an Annual General Adjustment of Rent for 2017 of 3.4%.  
	  Attachments: [Staff Report](../memo/006)  
	  [ATT 1 - Resolution to Adopt AGA of Rent for 2017 - PDF for now](../att/004.pdf)  
	  [ATT 2 - 2017 CPI - PDF for now](../att/005.pdf)     

      2. Consider Annual General Adjustment of Rent for 2016  
	  Recommendation: Direct staff whether to agendize an Annual General Adjustment of Rent for 2016 at a future meeting.  
	  Attachments: [Staff Report](../memo/007)  
	  [ATT1 - CPI 2016 - PDF for now](../att/006.pdf)    

      3. Adopt Rules of Conduct for Rental Housing Committee Meetings  
	  Recommendation: Adopt a Resolution Establishing the Rules of Conduct for Rental Housing Committee Meetings.  
	  Attachments:  
	  [Staff Report](../memo/008)  
	  [ATT 1- Resolution to Adopt Rules of Conduct - PDF for now](att/007.pdf)      

      4. Consider A Fair Return Standard  
	  Recommendation: Hear a presentation and consider whether to adopt MNOI as a fair return standard, provide further direction to solicit public input and draft a fair return regulation to be presented to the RHC at a future meeting.  
	  Attachments:  
	  [Staff Report](../memo/009)  
	  [ATT 1 - CSFRA SECTION 1710](https://library.municode.com/ca/mountain_view/codes/code_of_ordinances?nodeId=PTITHCH_ARTXVIICOSTFAREAC_S1710PEINREADAS)  
	  [ATT 2 - Kenneth Baar Fair Return Memo](../att/008)      

8. COMMITTEE/STAFF ANNOUNCEMENTS AND/OR REPORTS
No action will be taken on any questions raised by the Commission at this time.

9. ADJOURNMENT
Adjourn to the Regular Meeting of the RHC on Monday, May 22, 2017, in the Plaza Conference Room, City Hall, 500 Castro Street.  Meeting date, time, and venue are subject to change.  Please check online at www.mountainview.gov as an agenda will be posted the Thursday prior to the RHC meeting.

SPECIAL NOTICE—Reference:  Americans with Disabilities Act, 1990
- Anyone   who   is   planning   to   attend   a   meeting   who   is   visually   or   hearing-impaired   or   has   any   disability   that   needs   special assistance   should   call   the   Community   Development   Department   at   (650)   903-6306 48 hours   in   advance   of   the   meeting   to arrange  for  assistance.    Upon  request,  in  advance,  by  a  person  with  a  disability,  agendas  and  writings  distributed  during  the meeting  that  are  public  records  will  be  made  available  in  the  appropriate  alternative  format.    Also  upon  request,  in  advance, an assistive listening device can be made available for use during the meeting.
- The   Board,   Commission,   or   Committee   may   take   action   on   any   matter   noticed   herein   in   any   manner   deemed   appropriate by   the   Board,   Commission,   or   Committee.      Their   consideration   of   the   matters   noticed   herein   is   not   limited   by   the recommendations indicated herein.

AGENDAS FOR BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
- The  specific  location  of  each  meeting  is  noted  on  the  notice  and  agenda  for  each  meeting  which  is  posted  at  least  72 hours in  advance  of  the  meeting.    Special  meetings  may  be  called  as  necessary  by  the  Commission  Chair  and  noticed  at  least  24 hours in advance of the meeting.
- Questions and comments regarding the agenda may be directed to the CSFRA Staff at (650) 903-6131.
- Interested   persons   may   review   the   agenda   and   staff   reports   at   the   Community   Development   offices,   500 Castro   Street, First Floor; the Friday afternoon before each meeting at 4:30 p.m. or soon thereafter; or online at http://laserfiche.mountainview.gov/Weblink; and they are available during each Commission meeting.

ADDRESSING THE BOARD, COMMISSION, OR COMMITTEE
- Interested persons are entitled to speak on any item on the agenda and should make their interest known to the Chair.
-  Anyone  wishing  to  address  the  Committee  on  a  nonagenda  item  may  do  so  during  the  "Oral  Communications"  part  of  the agenda.  Speakers are allowed to speak one time on any number of topics for up to three minutes.  


***
Last updated on 6/15/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.
