<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>
<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
                

## City of Mountain View
## Agenda
## Rental Housing Committee

### Chair Honey, Vice Chair Ortiz, Committee Members Grunewald, Means, Ramos and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

Monday, June 19, 2017  
7:00 PM  
Council Chambers - 500 Castro St.  

***

1. CALL TO ORDER - Welcome and Introductions  

2.  ROLL CALL  
Chair Vanessa Honey, Vice-Chair Evan Ortiz Committee Members Matthew Grunewald, Tom Means, Emily Ramos, Julian Pardo de Zela (alternate)  

3. MINUTES APPROVAL - Minutes for June 8, 2017  
Recommendation: Approve the minutes for June 8, 2017 RHC Meeting  
Copies of the minutes for the above-noted meetings have been delivered to Committee Members and copies are available at City Hall.  If there are no corrections or additions, a motion is in order to approve these minutes.  
Attachments: [Minutes for June, 2017](../minutes/06082017)

4. ORAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PUBLIC  
This portion of the meeting is reserved for persons wishing to address the Commission on any matter not on the agenda.  Speakers are limited to three minutes.  State law prohibits the Commission from acting on non-agenda items.

5. PUBLIC HEARING - None

6. UNFINISHED BUSINESS  
    1. Continued discussion of a Fair Return Standard  
	Recommendation: Review public input regarding the selection of a Fair Return Standard, for further discussion and potential direction to staff to draft regulations for a Fair Return Standard for future discussion and adoption by the RHC.  
	Attachments: [Staff Report](../memo/012)  
	[ATT 1 - Fair Return Standard Memo 5/22](../memo/009)  
	[ATT 2 - Fair Return PowerPoint 5/22](../att/011.pdf)  
	[ATT 3 - Written Public Input on Fair Return Standard](../att/012.pdf)  
	[ATT 4 - Draft Definitions of Capital Improvements](../att/013.pdf)  
	[ATT 5 - Draft Amortization Schedule](../att/014.pdf)  

7.  NEW BUSINESS  
      1. Consider Hearing Process Regulations for Individual Rent Adjustment under the CSFRA  
	  Recommendation: Hear a presentation on Draft Regulations for Hearing Process for Individual Rent Adjustment and provide direction to staff re: regulation and public input prior to adoption.  
	  Attachments:  
	  [Staff Report](../memo/013)  
	  [ATT 1 - Chapter 5 Hearing Process Regulations - PDF for now](../att/015.pdf) 

8. COMMITTEE/STAFF ANNOUNCEMENTS AND/OR REPORTS
No action will be taken on any questions raised by the Commission at this time.  

9.  CLOSED SESSION (TO BE HELD IN THE PLAZA CONFERENCE ROOM IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING ITEM 8)  
CONFERENCE WITH LEGAL COUNSEL - ANTICIPATED LITIGATION 
Initiation of litigation pursuant to paragraph (4) of subdivision (d) of Section 54956.9: One potential case.

10. ADJOURNMENT
Adjourn to the Regular Meeting of the RHC on Monday, May 22, 2017, in the Plaza Conference Room, City Hall, 500 Castro Street.  Meeting date, time, and venue are subject to change.  Please check online at www.mountainview.gov as an agenda will be posted the Thursday prior to the RHC meeting.

SPECIAL NOTICE—Reference:  Americans with Disabilities Act, 1990
- Anyone   who   is   planning   to   attend   a   meeting   who   is   visually   or   hearing-impaired   or   has   any   disability   that   needs   special assistance   should   call   the   Community   Development   Department   at   (650)   903-6306 48 hours   in   advance   of   the   meeting   to arrange  for  assistance.    Upon  request,  in  advance,  by  a  person  with  a  disability,  agendas  and  writings  distributed  during  the meeting  that  are  public  records  will  be  made  available  in  the  appropriate  alternative  format.    Also  upon  request,  in  advance, an assistive listening device can be made available for use during the meeting.
- The   Board,   Commission,   or   Committee   may   take   action   on   any   matter   noticed   herein   in   any   manner   deemed   appropriate by   the   Board,   Commission,   or   Committee.      Their   consideration   of   the   matters   noticed   herein   is   not   limited   by   the recommendations indicated herein.

AGENDAS FOR BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
- The  specific  location  of  each  meeting  is  noted  on  the  notice  and  agenda  for  each  meeting  which  is  posted  at  least  72 hours in  advance  of  the  meeting.    Special  meetings  may  be  called  as  necessary  by  the  Commission  Chair  and  noticed  at  least  24 hours in advance of the meeting.
- Questions and comments regarding the agenda may be directed to the CSFRA Staff at (650) 903-6131.
- Interested   persons   may   review   the   agenda   and   staff   reports   at   the   Community   Development   offices,   500 Castro   Street, First Floor; the Friday afternoon before each meeting at 4:30 p.m. or soon thereafter; or online at http://laserfiche.mountainview.gov/Weblink; and they are available during each Commission meeting.

ADDRESSING THE BOARD, COMMISSION, OR COMMITTEE
- Interested persons are entitled to speak on any item on the agenda and should make their interest known to the Chair.
-  Anyone  wishing  to  address  the  Committee  on  a  nonagenda  item  may  do  so  during  the  "Oral  Communications"  part  of  the agenda.  Speakers are allowed to speak one time on any number of topics for up to three minutes.

***
Last updated on 6/16/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.
