## City of Mountain View
## Agenda
## Rental Housing Committee

### Chair Honey, Vice Chair Ortiz, Committee Members Grunewald, Means, Ramos and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

Monday, September 11, 2017  
6:00 PM  
Plaza Conference Room - 500 Castro St.  

***

### CLOSED SESSION (TO BE HELD IN THE PLAZA CONFERENCE ROOM)

1. CLOSED SESSION ANNOUNCEMENT (OPEN SESSION)

2. CLOSED SESSION  
  2.1  CONFERENCE WITH LEGAL COUNSEL—EXISTING LITIGATIONGovernment Code Section 54956.9(d)(1), two cases:  
  Name of case: Rental Housing Committee v. California Apartment Association, Joan MacDonald, and Steven Chandler, Santa Clara County Superior Court Case No. 17-CV-314254  
  Name of case: Joan MacDonald and Steven Chandler v. Rental Housing Committee, and Does 1 through 50 Inclusive, Santa Clara Superior Court Case No. 17-CV-314995  

3. CLOSED SESSION REPORT  

REGULAR SESSON (TO BE HELD IN THE COUNCIL CHAMBERS)  

4. CALL TO ORDER - Welcome and Introductions  

5.  ROLL CALL  
Chair Vanessa Honey, Vice-Chair Evan Ortiz Committee Members Matthew Grunewald, Tom Means, Emily Ramos, Julian Pardo de Zela (alternate)  

6. MINUTES APPROVAL - Minutes for July 24, 2017  
Recommendation: Approve the minutes for July 24, 2017 RHC Meeting  
Copies of the minutes for the above-noted meetings have been delivered to Committee Members and copies are available at City Hall.  If there are no corrections or additions, a motion is in order to approve these minutes.  
Attachments: [Minutes for July 24, 2017](../minutes/07242017)  

Recommendation: Approve the minutes for August 28, 2017 RHC Meeting  
Copies of the minutes for the above-noted meetings have been delivered to Committee Members and copies are available at City Hall.  If there are no corrections or additions, a motion is in order to approve these minutes.  
Attachments: [Minutes for August 28, 2017](../minutes/08282017)  

7. ORAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PUBLIC  
This portion of the meeting is reserved for persons wishing to address the Commission on any matter not on the agenda.  Speakers are limited to three minutes.  State law prohibits the Commission from acting on non-agenda items.

8. PUBLIC HEARING - None

9. UNFINISHED BUSINESS  
    1. Consideration of Establishing the Effective Date of the Community Stabilization and Fair Rent Act  
	Recommendation: Adopt a Resolution Establishing the Effective Date of the Community Stabilization and Fair Rent Act.  
	Attachments: [Staff Report](../memo/020)  
	[ATT 1 - July 24, 2017 Item 7.1 Effective Date Staff Report](../memo/017)  
	[ATT 2 - Resolution](../att/030)  
	
10.  NEW BUSINESS  
      1. Proposed Information Technology System including Database/Registry  
	  Recommendation: Approve the development of an Information Technology System including Database/Registry.  
	  Attachments:  
	  [Staff Report](../memo/021)   

      2. Proposed Staffing Plan  
	  Recommendation: Approve the proposed Staffing Plan.    
	  Attachments:  
	  [Staff Report](../memo/022)   

      3. CSFRA Fee Methology and Program  
	  Recommendation: Provide input on fee methodology and program for the CSFRA.    
	  Attachments:  
	  [Staff Report](../memo/023)   

11. COMMITTEE/STAFF ANNOUNCEMENTS AND/OR REPORTS
No action will be taken on any questions raised by the Commission at this time.  

12. ADJOURNMENT
Adjourn to the Regular Meeting of the RHC on Monday, October 9, 2017, in the Council Chambers, City Hall, 500 Castro Street.  Meeting date, time, and venue are subject to change. Please check online at www.mountainview.gov as an agenda will be posted the Thursday prior to the RHC meeting.

AGENDAS FOR BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
- The  specific  location  of  each  meeting  is  noted  on  the  notice  and  agenda  for  each  meeting  which  is  posted  at  least  72 hours in  advance  of  the  meeting.    Special  meetings  may  be  called  as  necessary  by  the  Commission  Chair  and  noticed  at  least  24 hours in advance of the meeting.
- Questions and comments regarding the agenda may be directed to the RHC at (650) 903-6125 or RHC@mountainview.gov. 
- Interested   persons   may   review   the   agenda   and   staff   reports   at   the   Community   Development   offices,   500 Castro   Street, First Floor; the Friday afternoon before each meeting at 4:30 p.m. or soon thereafter; or online at [http://laserfiche.mountainview.gov/Weblink;](http://laserfiche.mountainview.gov/Weblink) and they are available during each Commission meeting.

SPECIAL NOTICE—Reference:  Americans with Disabilities Act, 1990
- Anyone   who   is   planning   to   attend   a   meeting   who   is   visually   or   hearing-impaired   or   has   any   disability   that   needs   special assistance   should   call   the   Community   Development   Department   at   (650)   903-6306 48 hours   in   advance   of   the   meeting   to arrange  for  assistance.    Upon  request,  in  advance,  by  a  person  with  a  disability,  agendas  and  writings  distributed  during  the meeting  that  are  public  records  will  be  made  available  in  the  appropriate  alternative  format.    Also  upon  request,  in  advance, an assistive listening device can be made available for use during the meeting.
- The   Board,   Commission,   or   Committee   may   take   action   on   any   matter   noticed   herein   in   any   manner   deemed   appropriate by   the   Board,   Commission,   or   Committee.      Their   consideration   of   the   matters   noticed   herein   is   not   limited   by   the recommendations indicated herein.

ADDRESSING THE BOARD, COMMISSION, OR COMMITTEE
- Interested persons are entitled to speak on any item on the agenda and should make their interest known to the Chair.
-  Anyone  wishing  to  address  the  Committee  on  a  nonagenda  item  may  do  so  during  the  "Oral  Communications"  part  of  the agenda.  Speakers are allowed to speak one time on any number of topics for up to three minutes.

***
Last updated on 8/23/2017  