<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>
<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
                

## City of Mountain View
## Minutes
## Rental Housing Committee

### Comittee Members Grunewald, Means, Ramos, Vice Chair Ortiz, Chair Honey, and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

Monday, May 22, 2017  
8:00 PM  
Council Chambers  

***

1. CALL TO ORDER - Welcome and Introductions  

2. ROLL CALL  
Chair Vanessa Honey, Vice-Chair Evan Ortiz Committee Members Matthew Grunewald, Tom Means, Emily Ramos, Julian Pardo de Zela (alternate)

3. MINUTES APPROVAL  
    1. Approval of Minutes  
	**MOTION - M/S - Honey/Means  
	To approve the minutes for May 8, 2017 RHC Meeting.  
	Yes: 5 - Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, Committee Member Means, Vice Chair Ortiz, and Chairperson Honey**  

4. ORAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PUBLIC  
Steven Goldstein expressed concerns regarding the effective date of the CSFRA.  
John Inks encouraged the committee to look at the legal/economic effects of the CSFRA  on landlords.  
Alberto Martin, landlord, expressed concerns about rising utility fees and rolled back rental rates under the CSFRA.  
David Avny, landlord, expressed concerns regarding high property tax rates and rolled back rental rates under the CSFRA.  
Paul Norton, landlord, concerned about fair rate of return on rental property under the CSFRAElizabeth Lindsey, landlord, encouraged committee to adopt max CPI rate to allow landlords to maintain their property.  
Beth Walsh, landlord, asked committee to consider the financial impact of the CSFRA on small landlords.

5. PUBLIC HEARING - None

6. UNFINISHED BUSINESS - None

7.  NEW BUSINESS  
      1. Adopt Annual General Adjustment of Rent for 2017  
	  Associate Planner van Deursen presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	  SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	  David Avny  
	  Paul Norton  
	  Alberto Martin  
	  Maria Morgan Butcher  
	  Elizabeth Lindsey  
	  Richard Jones  
	  Joe Maydak  
	  **MOTION - M/S - Means/Ortiz  
	  To adopt a Resolution of an Annual General Adjustment of rent for 2017 of 3.4%  
	  Yes - 5 : Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, Committee Member Means, Vice Chair Ortiz, and Chairperson Honey**

      2. Consider Annual General Adjustment of Rent for 2016  
	  Associate Planner van Deursen presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	  SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	  Gemma Donofrio  
	  Tod Spieker  
	  Keith Sargent  
	  Maria Morgan Butcher  
	  Steven Goldstein  
	  **MOTION - M/S - Means/Honey  
	  To consider agendizing an Annual General Adjustment of Rent for 2016 in the next meeting.  
	  Yes - 4 :Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, Committee Member Means, and Chairperson Honey  
	  No - 1 :Vice Chair Ortiz**      

      3. Adopt Rules of Conduct for Rental Housing Committee Meetings  
	  Associate Planner van Deursen presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	  SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	  Joshua Howard  
	  **MOTION - M/S - Ortiz/Means  
	  To adopt a Resolution establishing the Rules of Conduct for Rental Housing Committee Meetings.  
	  Yes - 5:Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, Committee Member Means, Vice Chair Ortiz, and Chairperson Honey**  

      4. Consider A Fair Return Standard  
	  Karen Tiedemann and Justin Bigelow, Special Council, Goldfarb and Lipman presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	  SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	  Curt Conroy  
	  Tod Spieker  
	  Alberto Martin  
	  Joe Maydak  
	  Dave A.  
	  Patrick Moore  
	  Steven Goldstein  
	  Keith Sargent  
	  Maria Morgan Butcher  
	  Joshua Howard  
	  Richard Jones  
	  Susan Ta  
	  Committee directed staff to organize landlord and tenant stake holder meetings for public input on Fair Return Standard options.  

8. COMMITTEE/STAFF ANNOUNCEMENTS AND/OR REPORTS  


9. ADJOURNMENT  - At 11:23 p.m., Chair Honey adjourned the meeting to the next RHC Committee Meeting to be held on Thursday, June 8, 2017 at 7:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers, 500 Castro Street.


***
Last updated on 6/15/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.
