<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>
<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
                

## City of Mountain View
## Minutes  
## Rental Housing Committee

### Chair Honey, Vice Chair Ortiz, Committee Members Grunewald, Means, Ramos and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

Monday, June 8, 2017  
7:00 PM  
Plaza Conference Room  

***

1. CALL TO ORDER  
The meeting was called to order at 7:00 pm. 

2.  ROLL CALL  
Present: 6 - Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, Committee Member Means, and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

3. MINUTES APPROVAL - Minutes for May 22, 2017  
MOTION: M/S - Ramos/ Means  
To approve minutes for May 22, 2017 RHC meeting with the correction to John Inks' statement in Oral Communication from the Public: John Inks encouraged the committee to look at the legal/economic effects of the CSFRA on landlords and tenants.  

Yes: 5 - Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, and Committee Member Means  

4. ORAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PUBLIC  
Sue Graham introduced Tamara Lewis as an observer from the League of Women Voters.  
Susan Almond, tenant, shared the effects of high rents on her family.  
Steven Goldstein expressed concern regarding legality of CSFRA effective date.  
Alison Hicks, homeowner, supports CSFRA as a response to the erosion of community and growing homelessness.  
Mike Fischetti informed committee of the broad support for CSFRA by the Mountain View community as a whole.  
Marilyn Winkleby shared stories with the committee about community members effected by high rents.  
Emey Chu, property owner, expressed concern about the burdens of the CSFRA on landlords.  
Anna Marie Morales requested that the CSFRA also apply to mobile homes.  
Job Lopez reminded the committee of their obligation to act fairly and justly.  
Elizabeth Lindsey encouraged the committee to look at cost increases and their effect on small landlords.

5. PUBLIC HEARING - None

6. UNFINISHED BUSINESS  
    1. General Adjustment of Rent for 2016  
	City Attorney  Quinn presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	Steven Goldstein  
	Curt Conroy  
	Tino B.  
	Patrick Moore  
	Gail Nyhan  
	Joe Maydak  
	Gavansala  
	Emey Chu  
	MOTION: M/S - Ramos/ Means  
	The RHC deferred consideration of AGA for Gap between October 19, 2015 - February 2016  
	Yes: 5 - Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, and Committee Member Means  
	
	2. Update on Public Input Process for Consideration of Fair Return Standard  
	Associate Planner van Deursen presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	Tamara Lewis  
	Partick Moore  
	Edie Keating  
	Joan MacDonald  
	The RHC did not take any action.  

7.  NEW BUSINESS  
      1. Consider Petition Process Regulations for Individual Rent Adjustment under the CSFRA  
	  Associate Planner van Deursen presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	  SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	  Steve Welter  
	  Emily Hislop  
	  Tino B.  
	  Joe Maydak  
	  Curtis Conroy  
	  Patrick Moore  
	  Brian  
	  Edie Keating  
	  Philip Cosby  
	  Elizabeth Lindsey   
	  Steven Goldstein  
	  The RHC presented some suggestions to staff and decided to consider the Petition Process regulations, the Hearing Process regulations and a Fair Rate of Return standard together at a future meeting
	  
	  2. Hearing Officer Criteria, Remuneration and Hiring Process  
	  Associate Planner van Deursen presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	  SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	  Mike Kasperzak  
	  Emily Hislop  
	  Joe Maydak  
	  Patrick Moore  
	  John Inks  
	  Tino B.  
	  Edie Keating  
	  The RHC agreed with the staff recommendations regaring hearing officer criteria, remuneration and hiring process. These items will be presented in future meetings  

8. COMMITTEE/STAFF ANNOUNCEMENTS AND/OR REPORTS

9. ADJOURNMENT - At 10:54 p.m., Chair Honey adjourned the meeting to the next RHC Committee Meeting to be held on Monday, June 19, 2017 at 7:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers, 500 Castro Street.  

***
Last updated on 6/16/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.
