## City of Mountain View
## Agenda
## Rental Housing Committee

### Chair Honey, Vice Chair Ortiz, Committee Members Grunewald, Means, Ramos and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

Monday, June 19, 2017  
7:00 PM  
Council Chambers - 500 Castro St.  

***

1. CALL TO ORDER  
  The meeting was called to order at 7:00 p.m.

2.  ROLL CALL  
  Present: 5 - Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, and Committee Member Means  
  Absent: 1 - Pardo de Zela (alternate) 

3. MINUTES APPROVAL - Minutes for June 8, 2017  
That the Rental Housing Committee approve the following minutes:June 8, 2017 Rental Housing Committee meeting  
**MOTION: M/S - Ortiz/Means - To approve minutes for June 8, 2017 with a correction to the vote on agenda item 6.1: to reflect the vote was 4 (Vice Chair Ortiz, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, and Committee Member Means)  to 1(Chairperson Honey).  
The motion carried by the following vote:  
Yes: 5 - Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, and Committee Member Means**  

4. ORAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PUBLIC  - None  

5. PUBLIC HEARING - None

6. UNFINISHED BUSINESS  
    1. Continued discussion of a Fair Return Standard  
	Associate Planner van Deursen presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	* Joe Maydak 
	* Irene Yoshida  
	* Frank Rossi
	* Dave Arnone  
	* Kris Grover  
	* Edie Keating  
	* Job Lopez  
	* Amy Silletto  
	* Michael Kahan  
	* Audrey Ferbes 
	* Jackie Todesco  
	* Joan MacDonald  
	* Daniel Saver  
	* Fred Kiani  
	* Liana Rossi  
	* Jennifer Liu  
	* Jenny Zhao  
	* Alberto Martin  
	* Jennie Lee  
	* Juliet Brodie  
	* Diane Gass  
	* Kara Sanchez  
	* Miguel Sanchez  
	* Brian Gawalt 
	* Mrs. Lin Voytilla 
	* Elizabeth Lindsay  
	* Mellissa Morris  
	**MOTION: M/S – Ortiz/Ramos – Direct staff to draft regulations for the MNOI – CPI Adjustment fair return standard for future discussion and adoption by the RHC.  
	The motion carried by the following vote:  
	Yes: 3 - Vice Chair Ortiz, Committee Member Grunewald, and Committee Member Ramos  
	No: 2 - Chairperson Honey, and Committee Member Means**  
	
The Committee recessed at  9:45 p.m. and reconvened at 9:55 p.m.  

7.  NEW BUSINESS  
      1. Consider Hearing Process Regulations for Individual Rent Adjustment under the CSFRA  
	  MOTION: M/S - Honey/Means - To move agenda item 7.1, Hearing Process Regulations for Individual Rent Adjustment under the CSFRA, to be considered at a future RHC meeting.  
	  The motion carried by the following vote:  
	  Yes: 4 - Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, and Committee Member Means  
	  No: 1 - Committee Member Ramos**  

8. COMMITTEE/STAFF ANNOUNCEMENTS AND/OR REPORTS
Chairperson Honey proposed to amend Section 302 of the Rules of Conduct and to move Oral Communications from the Public on non-agenda items to a later agenda point in the meeting, after agenda item New Business.  

**MOTION: Chairperson Honey moved to have staff bring back a revised regulation to move agenda item: Oral Communications to follow agenda item: New Business.  
Motion failed for lack of second**  

9.  CLOSED SESSION (TO BE HELD IN THE PLAZA CONFERENCE ROOM IMMEDIATELY FOLLOWING ITEM 8)  
CONFERENCE WITH LEGAL COUNSEL - ANTICIPATED LITIGATION 
Chairperson Honey announced the closed session and asked for public comment on the item.   
SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
Jennie Lee  
The committee recessed to the Plaza Conference Room.  
Following the closed session, the City Attorney announced: The Committee provided direction to initiate an action and the action, the defendants, and the other particulars shall, once formally commenced be disclosed to any person upon inquiry. The vote was unanimous.  

10. ADJOURNMENT
At 12:10 a.m., Chair Honey adjourned the meeting to the next RHC Committee Meeting to be held on Monday, July 10, 2017 at 7:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers, 500 Castro Street.  

***
Last updated on 7/5/2017  