## City of Mountain View
## Minutes
## Rental Housing Committee

### Chair Honey, Vice Chair Ortiz, Committee Members Grunewald, Means, Ramos and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

Monday, July 10, 2017  
7:00 PM  
Council Chambers - 500 Castro St.  

***

1. CALL TO ORDER  
  The meeting was called to order at 7:02 p.m. 

2.  ROLL CALL  
Present: (6) Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, Committee Member Means, and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

3. MINUTES APPROVAL - Minutes for June 19, 2017  
**Motion: M/S - Honey/ Ramos - To approve the mintutes for June 19, 2017 RHC meeting. The motion was carried by the following vote:  
Yes: (5) Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, and Committee Member Means**  

4. ORAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PUBLIC  
Steven Goldstein urged the RHC to establish a correct effective date for the CSFRA.  
Mike Fischetti discussed rent stabilization as means to address homelessness in Mountain View.  
Tino Barragan explained the importance of the RHC to protect the renters of Mountain View.  
Hue Simpson, resident manager, presented data on the income and expenses of her building.  
Yesenia Herrera expressed that a Fair Rate of Return should address the needs of the community and not landlord profits.  
Brian Luna urged the RHC to preserve the original intent of the CSFRA.  
Kathy, landlord, encouraged landlords and tenants to work together.  
James Hersh, tenant, shared a personal story of high rents effecting the working class and asked the RHC to keep the spirit of The CSFRA intact.  
Amy Silletto, a resident owner, voted in favor of rent control to stop the displacement of local residents.  
David Avny asked the RHC to consider allowing him to implement a second rent increase due to below market rents.  
Bonnie Malouf pointed out that high rents are effecting the working class and are eliminating diversity in Mountain View.  
Emey Chu, landlord, expressed concern about the ability of landlords with older buildings to compete with new buildings.  
Allison Hicks, former landlord in Berkeley, expressed that Landlords are able to experience tremendous increase in property value under rent control laws.  

5. PUBLIC HEARING - None

6. UNFINISHED BUSINESS  
    1. Adoption of Regulations for Petition & Hearing Process and Fair Return Standard  
	Eric Phillips and Justin Bigelow, Special Council, Goldfarb and Lipman presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	The Committee recessed at 10:08 p.m. and reconvened at 10:22 p.m.  
	SPEAKING FROM THE FLOOR WITH COMMENTS:  
	Kathy  
	Curt Conroy  
	Tino Barragan  
	Emey Chu  
	Alberto Martin  
	John W. Lashlee IV  
	Scott Haiden  
	Steven Goldstein  
	Joe Maydak  
	Joan MacDonald  
	Fred Kiani  
	Edie Keating  
	Daniel Saver  
	Jenny Zhao  
	Jennifer Liu  
	Raymond Yee  
	Bonnie Liu  
	Elizabeth Lindsay  
	Joshua Howard  
	Jenny Lee  
	
	**MOTION: M/S - Honey/ Means - To continue Item 6.1, Adoption of Regulations for Petition & Hearing Process and Fair Return Standard, to the July 24, 2017 RHC meeting. The motion carried by the following vote:  
	Yes: (4) Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, and Committee Member Means  
	No: (1) Committee Member Ramos**  


7.  NEW BUSINESS  
      1. Reimbursement of Funding Advanced by the City to Implement the CSFRA  
	  **MOTION: M/S - Honey/Means - To continue Item 7.1, Reimbursement of Funding Advanced by the City to Implement the CSFRA, to the July 24, 2017 RHC meeting. The motion carried by the following vote:   
	  Yes: (4) Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, and Committee Member Means  
	  No: (1) Committee Member Ramos**  

8. COMMITTEE/STAFF ANNOUNCEMENTS AND/OR REPORTS
No action will be taken on any questions raised by the Commission at this time.  

9. ADJOURNMENT
At 11:53 p.m., Chair Honey adjourned the meeting to the next RHC Committee Meeting to be held on Monday, July 24, 2017 at 7:00 p.m. in the Council Chambers, 500 Castro Street.   

***
Last updated on 7/19/2017  