## City of Mountain View
## Agenda
## Rental Housing Committee

### Chair Honey, Vice Chair Ortiz, Committee Members Grunewald, Means, Ramos and Pardo de Zela (alternate)

Monday, July 24, 2017  
7:00 PM  
Council Chambers - 500 Castro St.  

***

1. CALL TO ORDER - Welcome and Introductions  

2.  ROLL CALL  
Chair Vanessa Honey, Vice-Chair Evan Ortiz Committee Members Matthew Grunewald, Tom Means, Emily Ramos, Julian Pardo de Zela (alternate)  

3. MINUTES APPROVAL - Minutes for July 10, 2017  
  **MOTION: M/S - Ortiz / Honey - To approve the minutes for July 10, 2017 RHC meeting.  
  The motion carried by the following vote:  
  Yes (5):Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, and Committee Member Means**  

4. ORAL COMMUNICATIONS FROM THE PUBLIC  
  Chairperson Honey proposed to move Oral Communications from the Public on non-agenda items to a later agenda point in the meeting, after agenda item Unfinished Business.  
  **MOTION: M/S - Honey / Means - To move agenda item 4: Oral Communications from the Public to follow agenda item 6: Unfinished Business. The motion carried by the following vote:  
  Yes (5): Vice Chair Ortiz, Chairperson Honey, Committee Member Grunewald, Committee Member Ramos, and Committee Member Means**

5. PUBLIC HEARING

6. UNFINISHED BUSINESS  
    1. Continued discussion of Regulations for Petition & Hearing Process and Fair Return Standard  
	Associate Planner van Deursen and Eric Philips and Justin Bigelow, Special Council, Goldfarb and Lipman, presented an oral staff report and responded to questions.  
	**MOTION 1: M/S - Means/ Honey - Adopt a resolution establishing regulations for the petition process, hearing process, and a fair return standard for petitions for individual rent adjustments under the CSFRA by adopting Chapters 4 (Petition Process), 5 ( Hearing Procedure), and 6 (Fair Return Standard) as recommended by staff.With the following modifications:  
	  Chapter 4  
	    * Add a new Section D.6:  
		  * If any of the documents listed in Section E, F, G, or H exist but are not readily available, then the Petitioner must identify the document to the greatest extent feasible and explain why the document cannot be obtained by Petitioner via ordinary means.  
		* Delete the following from Section G:  
		  * If any of the documents listed in Subsection 1 through 6 of Section G exist but are not readily available, then the Petitioner must identify the document to the greatest extent feasible and explain why the document cannot be obtained by Petitioner via ordinary means.  
		* Amend and restate Section H in its entirety as follows:  
		H. Petition Requirements: Upward Rent Adjustment - Fair Rate of Return  
		A Petition for an Individual Upward Rent Adjustment shall include relevant evidence necessary to support each claim raised in the Petition, as described in the Petition form.  Relevant evidence for individual claims that may be raised through an Upward Rent Adjustment Petition may include:  
		1. The requested Rent increase for each Rental Unit;  
		2. The proposed effective date of Rent increase;  
		3. A description of the facilities on the property, including the number of Rental Units, number of bedrooms and bathrooms for each Rental Unit, and an explanation of other relevant facilities and Housing Services;  
		4. A description of the allocation of utility costs;  
		5. The purchase date and purchase price;  
		6. A Rent roll identifying current Rents received itemized by Unit;  
		7. Documentation of Base Year and Petition Year Operating Expenses, sorted by category, and labeled in order to enable prompt location of any expense documents;  
		8. Income and expense summaries for three (3) years preceding the Petition Year;  
		9. A description and documentation of property tax increases or decreases for Base Year and Petition  Year ;  
		10. A description and documentation of unavoidable increases and/or decreases in Maintenance and Operating Expenses;  
		11. The cost of planned or completed Capital Improvements to any Rental Unit (as distinguished from ordinary repair, replacement, and maintenance), but only where such Capital Improvements are necessary to bring the Property into compliance or maintain compliance with applicable local codes affecting health and safety, and where such Capital Improvement costs are amortized over the life of the improvements as defined under the CSFRA and implementing Regulations;  
		12. A description and documentation of increases or decreases in the number of tenants occupying the Rental Unit, living space, furniture, furnishings, equipment, or other Housing Services provided, or occupancy rules to which the Petition applies;  
		13. A description and documentation of any substantial deterioration of the Rental Unit other than as a result of normal wear and tear;  
		14. Confirmation that the Landlord provides adequate Housing Services, and substantially complies with applicable state rental housing laws, local housing codes, health and safety codes, and the Rental Housing Agreement;  
		15. A description of Rent increases or decreases per Rental Unit during the occupancy of the current Tenant for each Rental Unit to which the Petition applies; and  
		16. Any additional explanation relevant to justify the Petition (including any expert documentation prepared in support of the Petition).  
		
		Chapter 5  
		* In Section B.2, add to the list of selection criteria that any individuals who own a property in Mountain View that could qualify as a rent stabilized unit are ineligible to be selected as a Hearing Officer.  
		Chapter 6  
		* Amend and restate Section C.1 in its entirety as follows:  
		  * Base Year. The Base Year is calendar year 2015.  
		* Amend and restate Section C.4 in its entirety as follows:  
		  * Consumer Price Index. Consumer Price Index is the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers for "Rent of primary residence" in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, California metropolitan area as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics and currently listed as series number CUURA422SEHA, as it may be revised.  
		  or  
		  * Consumer Price Index. Consumer Price Index is the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers in the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose, California metropolitan area as published by the United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics plus 1%.  
		* Add a new Section C.4.a as follows:  
		  a. Base Year Consumer Price Index.  The Consumer Price Index for the Base Year shall be the annual average of the Consumer Price Index for 2015 (371.075).  
		* Add a new Section C.4.b as follows:  
		  b. Petition Year Consumer Price Index. The Consumer Price Index for the Petition Year shall be the Consumer Price Index that was most recently published as of the date a Petition for Upward Adjustment of Rent is submitted.  
		* Accept Section E.1.g as drafted (6% of Gross Income presumed a reasonable management expense), but delete the parenthetical note.  
		* Delete Section E.1.i (Capital Reserves) in its entirety.  
		* Revise Section E.2.e to exclude all debt service from Operating Expenses as follows:  
		  * Debt service, including mortgage interest and principal payments for the acquisition, improvement, or maintenance of Covered Rental Unit and property containing Covered Rental Units if the debt was incurred, originated, or refinanced after October 19, 2015.  
	The motion did not come to a vote.

    2. Reimbursement of Funding Advanced by the City to Implement the CSFRA  
	  Recommendation: Acknowledge report and forthcoming request from the City Council for reimbursement of advanced funding.    
	  Attachments:  
	  [Staff Report](../memo/016) 
	
7.  NEW BUSINESS  
      1. Adopt Effective Date for the CSFRA  
	  Recommendation: Adopt a Resolution Establishing an Effective Date for the Community Stabilization and Fair Rent Act    
	  Attachments:  
	  [Staff Report](../memo/017)   

8. COMMITTEE/STAFF ANNOUNCEMENTS AND/OR REPORTS
No action will be taken on any questions raised by the Commission at this time.  

9. ADJOURNMENT
Adjourn to the Regular Meeting of the RHC on Monday, August 28, 2017, in the Council Chambers, City Hall, 500 Castro Street.  Meeting date, time, and venue are subject to change. Please check online at www.mountainview.gov as an agenda will be posted the Thursday prior to the RHC meeting.

AGENDAS FOR BOARDS, COMMISSIONS, AND COMMITTEES
- The  specific  location  of  each  meeting  is  noted  on  the  notice  and  agenda  for  each  meeting  which  is  posted  at  least  72 hours in  advance  of  the  meeting.    Special  meetings  may  be  called  as  necessary  by  the  Commission  Chair  and  noticed  at  least  24 hours in advance of the meeting.
- Questions and comments regarding the agenda may be directed to the RHC at (650) 903-6125 or RHC@mountainview.gov. 
- Interested   persons   may   review   the   agenda   and   staff   reports   at   the   Community   Development   offices,   500 Castro   Street, First Floor; the Friday afternoon before each meeting at 4:30 p.m. or soon thereafter; or online at [http://laserfiche.mountainview.gov/Weblink;](http://laserfiche.mountainview.gov/Weblink) and they are available during each Commission meeting.

SPECIAL NOTICE—Reference:  Americans with Disabilities Act, 1990
- Anyone   who   is   planning   to   attend   a   meeting   who   is   visually   or   hearing-impaired   or   has   any   disability   that   needs   special assistance   should   call   the   Community   Development   Department   at   (650)   903-6306 48 hours   in   advance   of   the   meeting   to arrange  for  assistance.    Upon  request,  in  advance,  by  a  person  with  a  disability,  agendas  and  writings  distributed  during  the meeting  that  are  public  records  will  be  made  available  in  the  appropriate  alternative  format.    Also  upon  request,  in  advance, an assistive listening device can be made available for use during the meeting.
- The   Board,   Commission,   or   Committee   may   take   action   on   any   matter   noticed   herein   in   any   manner   deemed   appropriate by   the   Board,   Commission,   or   Committee.      Their   consideration   of   the   matters   noticed   herein   is   not   limited   by   the recommendations indicated herein.

ADDRESSING THE BOARD, COMMISSION, OR COMMITTEE
- Interested persons are entitled to speak on any item on the agenda and should make their interest known to the Chair.
-  Anyone  wishing  to  address  the  Committee  on  a  nonagenda  item  may  do  so  during  the  "Oral  Communications"  part  of  the agenda.  Speakers are allowed to speak one time on any number of topics for up to three minutes.

***
Last updated on 7/19/2017  