<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>

<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
                

## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie L. Quinn, City Attorney  
### Subject: Election of a Chairperson and a Vice-Chairperson
### Date: May 4, 2017  

***

# INTRODUCTION & BACKGROUND  
The Community Stabilization and Fair Rent Act (“CSFRA”) Section 1709(a) provides: “Annually, the Committee shall elect one of its members to serve as Chairperson. The first order of business for the Rental Housing Committee (“RHC”) is to elect a Chairperson.” The CSFRA does not describe the roles and responsibilities of the Chairperson. Traditionally, the Chairperson oversees the conduct of the committee meetings and assists in the preparation of the RHC meeting agendas.  

The RHC can further define the roles and responsibilities of the Chairperson in the rules and regulations.As the Chairperson is being elected in May, the annual term may be from May to the end of April each year. Alternatively, the RHC may wish to consider a term that corresponds to the calendar year.  

# STAFF RECOMMENDATION  
The RHC nominate and elect one member of the RHC to serve as Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson and conduct an election for these positions.  

Prepared by:  
Jannie L. Quinn  
City Attorney

***
Last updated on 6/15/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.  
