<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>

<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
               
	   

## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie Quinn, City Attorney & Anky van Deursen, Associate Planner
### Subject: Consideration of Annual General Adjustment for 2016  
### Date: May 18, 2017  

***

# INTRODUCTION AND BACKGROUND  
The  CSFRA  provides  for  an  Annual  General  Adjustment  (“AGA”)  of  Rent  for  existing tenancies based on the percentage increase in the Consumer Price Index (for All Urban Consumers,  SF-Oakland-San  Jose  Region  (“CPI”)).    The  Committee  is  required  to announce the AGA no later than June 30 each year.  Per the CSFRA, the AGA shall be equal  to  100percent  of  the  percentage  increase  in  the  CPI  for  the  12-month  period ending as of March of the current year.  

# ANALYSIS  
Under  the  CSFRA,  the  first  AGA  must  be  announced  by  June  30,  2017  for  2017.However,  the base rent  rolls  back  to rent  in  effect  on October  19,  2015or  the  initial rental  rate  for  later  tenancies.    The  CSFRA requires  the  Committee  to  make  its  first announcement of an AGA no later than June 30, 2017 and further provides the first rent increase shall not take effect prior to September 1, 2017. However, the CSFRA does not expressly  addressthis  initial AGA should  alsocover  the  period  from  October  19,  2015 (base rent) to February 2016.  

The Rental Housing Committee (RHC)has the power and the duty to “set rents at fair and  equitable  levels  to  achieve  the  purpose  of”  the  CSFRA. The  RHC may  wish  to consider whether to includeAGA for this time periodwithin the first.  

# FISCAL IMPACT  
There is no fiscal impact to the RHC budget associated with this item.  

# STAFF DIRECTION  
Staff  seeks direction from the RHCwhether to prepare an agenda item for the RHC to consideradopting a General Rent Adjustment for 2016.  



***
Last updated on 6/15/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.  
