<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>

<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
               
	   

## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie Quinn, City Attorney & Anky van Deursen, Associate Planner
### Subject: Rental Housing Committee Rules of Conduct  
### Date: May 17, 2017  

***

# RECOMMENDATION  
Adopt  a  Resolution  Establishing  the  Rules  of  Conduct  for  Rental  Housing  Committee Meetings.

# BACKGROUND ANDANALYSIS  
The Rental Housing Committee (RHC) is tasked with a number of duties, including the establishment  of  rules  and  regulations  for  administration  and  enforcement  of  the Community  Stabilization  and  Fair  Rent  Act  (CSFRA).    Over  the  next  several  months, staff will present draft regulationson a variety of matters covered by the CSFRAfor the RHC’s consideration.  

As  its  first  regulation,  staff  proposes  the  RHC  establish  the  rules  for  the  conduct  of  its meetings.    The  attached  draft  regulations focus  onthe  public  meeting  process  for  the RHC,  including  the  agenda,  components  and  process,  public  comment,  and  other elements regarding conduct of the meetings.  

# REQUESTED STAFF DIRECTION  
Staff  requests  the  RHC  review  and  consider  the  draft  Rules  of  Conduct  for  RHC meetings.  The RHC can provide comments and/or adopt the resolution approving the proposed Rules of Conduct.  

# FISCAL IMPACT — There is no fiscal impact to the adoption of these Rules of Conduct.  

# PUBLIC NOTICING — Agenda posting.


***
Last updated on 6/15/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.  
