## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie Quinn, City Attorney & Anky van Deursen, Associate Planner & Karen Tiedemann, Special Counsel & Justin Bigelow, Special Counsel
### Subject: RHC Consideration of a Fair Return Standard  
### Date: May 22, 2017  

***

# INTRODUCTION  
One  purpose  of  the  Community  Stabilization  and  Fair  Rent  Act  (CSFRA)  is  to  control excessive  rent  increases  that  might otherwise  be  imposed  on  resident  renters,  while ensuring  landlords  may  receive  a  fair  and  reasonable  return  on  their  investment.    The dual  nature  of  this  CSFRA  purpose  is  a  common  function  of  government  regulatory authority:    the  CSFRA  must  not  unduly  burden  one  group  (landlords)  in  order  to benefit another group (renters).  

Rent  stabilization  laws  throughout  California  balance  the  benefits  and  burdens  of  rent stabilization  by  adopting  various  fair  return  standards.    This  staff  report  discusses  fair return standards, briefly reviewing the fair return concept as well as the legal necessity to  select  a  standard,  analyzing  three  standard  methodologies  for  calculating  a  fair return, and ultimately recommending that the Rental Housing Committee (RHC)select a  fair  return  standard  methodology  for  which  staff  may  draft  regulations  for  future discussion and adoption by the RHC.  

# BACKGROUND  
The   U.S.   and   California   Constitutions   prohibit   governments   from   taking   private property without just compensation.1Legal challenges to rent control have argued that limits   on   rent   increases   take   value   from   a   landlord’s   property   without   just compensation;  courts  have  disagreed  so  long  as  the  rent  control  ordinance  allows  a landlord  to  earn  a  reasonable  or  fair return.2The  California  Supreme  Court  has clarified  that  various  formulas  and  methodologies  may  be  used  to  reach  the  desired result  (allowing  a  fair  return),  and  for  constitutional  purposes, “it  is  the  result  reached not the method employed which is controlling.”3  

In addition to meeting the constitutional requirements for pricecontrols, adoption of a fair  return  standard  provides  benefits  to  landlords,  the  general  public,  and  the RHC.  Adopting  a  fair  return  standard  provides  clarity  and  transparency  to  the  public, including  landlords  whose  properties  are  regulated  by  the  CSFRA.    Landlords  will benefit from understanding what constitutes a fair return, especially if the RHC adopts a  clear  formula  upon  which  landlords  and  the  business  community  canrely  for  future transactions.  

Moreover,  adopting  one  formula  to  calculate  each  landlord’s  fair  return  provides consistency  among  all  landlords  regulated  by  the  CSFRA,  as  well  as  clear  guidance  to hearing  officers  and  to  the RHCwhen  addressing  petitions  by  landlords  for  rent increases.  For instance, without a standardized methodology to calculate a fair return, each  hearing  officer  could  treat  every  landlord’s  petition  for  rent  increase  differently.  Adopting  a  fair  return  standard  facilitates  equal  treatment  of  each  landlord and  their tenants.    Rent  stabilization  policies  without  a  standardized  fair  return  methodology could  be  subject  to  additional  legal  challenge  for  treating  similarlysituated  landlords differently and arbitrarily.  

Section   1710(a)   of   the   CSFRA   specifically charges   the RHCwith   promulgating regulations  to  clarify  the  petition  process  and  ensure  rents  are  set  to  allow  for  a landlord’s fair return.  Petitions will be heard and decided by hearing officers and may be  appealed  to  the RHC.    While  subsections  (2)  and  (3)  of  Section  1710(a)  identify factors   that   should   be   either   considered   or   excluded   from   consideration   when calculating   a   fair   return,   the   CSFRA   does   not   identify   or   create   a   fair   return methodology to apply uniformly to all petitions.  Within the constraints of subsections (2) and (3), the RHCmay adopt any of the fair return standards identified below, a new variant of the described standards, or none at all.  

# FAIR RETURN STANDARDS  
This section describes  three potential fair return standards that may be adopted by the RHCand concludes with an explanation of the staff recommendation.  

1. Maintenance of Net Operating Income—CPI Adjustment  
The  most  commonly  used  fair  return  standard in  California  focuses  on  the maintenance of net operating income (MNOI).  To calculate a landlord’s fair return for  a  rental  property, a  hearing  officer  would  look  to  the  landlord’s  gross  income from  the  property  and  total  qualified  operating  expenses  for the  property  from  a base year (2015) to identify the net operating income (NOI) for the base year.  After identifying the dollar amount of the base year NOI, that amount is increased by an inflationary index which increases with changes in the consumer price index (CPI) between  the  base  year  and  the  petition  year,  or  some  portion  of  the  CPI.    A simplified example calculationis provided in Table 1 below.  

The  MNOI—CPI  Adjustment  calculation  in  Table  1  shows  that  the  CPI  between 2015  (the  base  year)  and  2020(the  petition  year)  has  increased  by  40  points.  Accordingly,the  landlord’s  NOI  should  increase  by  40  percent  from  $60,000  to $84,000.    A  hearing  officer  would  review  the  gross  income  from  and  qualified expenses  for  the  property  in  the  petition  year  and authorize  a  rent  adjustment  (if necessary) to allow the landlord to earn an NOI of $84,000.

Table 1:MNOI—CPI Adjustment Sample Calculation  
| Year | CPI | Property Income | Property Operating Expenses | Net Operating Income |  
| --- | --- | --- | --- | --- |  
| 2015 | 100 | $100,000 | $40,000 | $60,000 |  
| 2020 | 140 |    |   | $84,000 |  

While   the   NOI   calculation   is   simple,   MNOI—CPI   Adjustment   methodology requires confirmation of operating expenses for the base and current years, which presents  challenges.    First,  as  previously  noted,  subsections  (2)  and  (3)  of  Section1710(a)  of  the  CSFRA  includes  and  excludes  certain  factors  for  purposes  of calculating  a  landlord’s  fair  return.    Second,  landlords  may  have  incomplete records  to  demonstrate  operating  expenses.    Finally,  operating  expenses  do  not always  increase  or  decrease  in  accordance  with  inflation  indexes—landlords  may have years with one-time spikes in expenses that can impact the determination of a petition  for  rent  increase.    The RHCcould  avoid  this  potential  evasion  of  the purposes  of  the  CSFRAwith  regulations that  give  hearing  officers  and  the RHCguidance on how to deal with anomalous situations to ensure that all petitions are considered using the same standards.  

2.Maintenance of Net Operating Income—Ratio Adjustment  
Another variant  of  the  MNOI  fair  returnstandard  allows  rent  increases  in  proportion to  increases  in  qualified  operating  expenses.    Again,  the  MNOI—Ratio  Adjustment compares NOI between a base year and the petition year.  However, the base year can be any year, including the 12 months prior to the petition year.  After the base year is defined  in  an  ordinance  or  regulation,  a  hearing  officer  calculates  the  NOI  for  a property for the base  year.  However, the NOI is the numerator of the NOI Ratio and the  operating  expenses  are  the  denominator  (e.g.,NOI/propertyoperatingexpenses).The hearing  officer  would  then  confirm  the  operating  expenses  for  the  petition  year.  Finally the hearing officer would compare the base year NOI Ratio to the petition year property  expenses  to  calculate  the  petition  year  NOI,  and  ultimately  any  increase  in rent.      A   simplified   example   calculation   using   the   MNOI—Ratio   Adjustment   is provided in Table 2 below.  

Table 2:  MNOI—Ratio Adjustment Sample Calculation  
pending...

The MNOI—Proportional Adjustment calculation in Table 2 shows that the landlord’s operating expenses increased from $40,000 to $60,000 between 2016 (the example base year) and 2020 (the petition year), which is a 50 percent increase in qualified operating expenses.    To  maintain  the  landlord’s  NOI  Ratio  of  1.5,  the  landlord’s  NOI  should equal  $90,000.    A  hearing  officer  would  review  the  actual  property  income  for  the petition  year  and  authorize  a  rent  adjustment  (if  necessary)  to  allow  the  landlord  to earn a gross income of $150,000, which would equal an NOI of $90,000 when property operating expenses are subtracted.  

Note, if the qualified operating expenses had increased by 40 percent between the base and  petition  years,  Table  2  would  provide  the  same  fair  return  to  the  landlord  as  the MNOI—CPI   Adjustment   example   in   Table   1.      The   two   MNOI   fair   return methodologies  emphasize  different  factors.    Table  3  offers  a  comparison  of  the  two MNOI methodologies based on a CPI increase of 40 percent and a 50 percent increase in  qualified  operating  expenses.    Table  3  assumes  rents   (property  income) also increased with the CPI from the base to petition years.  

Table 3:  MNOI—CPI and Ratio Adjustments Comparison  
pending...  

Asindicated  in  Table  3,  both  MNOI  calculations  require  careful  scrutiny  of  property operating expenses in the base and petition years.  In Table 3, the hearing officer would allocate either a $4,000 or $10,000 increase among the tenants in the property based on the  40  percent  increase  in  CPI  and  50  percent  increase  in  qualified  operating  expenses, respectively.    In  this  example,  the  Ratio  Adjustment  methodology  allows  a  greater increase  in  rents  due  to  the  increased  operating  expenses.    If  qualified  operating expenses  either  did  not  increase  or  decreased,  then  the  landlord  would  not  be  entitled to an increase beyond the Annual General Adjustment authorized by Section 1707 of the CSFRA.  

Generally,  the  CPI  Adjustment  methodology  will  offer  the  same  stability as  the  CPI, while  the  Ratio  Adjustment  methodology  will  respond  to  fluctuations  in  operating expenses.  

3.Fixed Return on Investment  

The Fixed Return on Investment methodology is a variation on the fair return standard that  was  developed  to  regulate utilities  and  later  adopted  by  some  jurisdictions  that regulate rents in mobile home parks.  First, a deliberative body will identify a standard rate of return (percentage) that applies to each landlord’s investment, generally between 4percentand 12percent.    The  standard  or  fair  rate  of  return  is  used  to  calculate  a landlord’s minimum NOI.  To determine whether a landlord is earning a fair return, a hearing  officer  would  first  identify  the  landlord’s  investment  (e.g.,the  value  of  the property   and   improvements).      Second,   the   hearing   officer   would   multiply   the investment by the adopted rate of return.  Third, the hearing officer would compare the sum  of  the  investment  multiplied  by  the  rate  of  return  with  the  net  operating  income before debt service.  If the investment multiplied by the rate of return is less than the net operating income, then the landlord would be entitled to increase rents on the property.  

Notably, the Fixed Return on Investment calculation can also be performed based on a landlord’s   actual   or   cash   investment   in   a   property.      However,   the   appropriate comparison   figure   for   a   Return   on   Investment   standard   using   the   actual   cash investment  is  project  cash  flow  (e.g.,NOIless  the  costs  of  debt  service).    Subsection (3)(A) of Section 1710(a) of the CSFRA expressly excludes certain debt service costs from the fair return calculation.4Accordingly, the examples in Table 4 use the property value (including improvements) as the “investment”in order to calculate the minimum NOI.  Table  4  provides two  simplified  examples  of  return  on  investment  calculations  using 5percentand 9percent  rates  of  return.    Both  examples  assume  a  $1Millionproperty value  (investment),  $120,000  in  gross  income, and $60,000  in  qualified  expenses  before debt service.  

Table 4:  Fixed Return on Investment Sample Calculation  
Pending... 

As shown in Table 4, the different rates of return on investment lead to large disparities in the rents that may be charged.  In addition to requiring careful scrutiny of operating expenses    (as    noted    regarding    MNOI   calculations),    the    return    on    investment methodology  demands  critical  examination  of  the  investment  valuation.    For  example, the  valuation  of  the  investment  (property  and  improvements)  could  bedefined  as  fair market  value  (with  or  without  depreciation),  which  could  require  an  appraisal  and other  documentation  that  would  increase  the  administrative  cost  for  a  petition  and subject rent increases to market swings.  Another variation could value the investment equal to the tax assessor’s valuation, which could subject tenants to large rent increases when a property changes ownership.  

# DISCUSSION  
All  three  standards  would  provide  clarity  and  transparency  to  the  general  public,  as well as certainty for landlords.  Likewise, the three methodologies have withstood prior legal  challenge.    Still,  there  are  different  benefits  and  burdens  related  to  each  of  the three  fair  return  methodologies  described  above  that  implicate  policy  decisions for  the RHC to consider.  

First,  the  easiest  methodology  to  administer  is  likely  the  MNOI—CPI  Adjustment calculation  because  it  requires  the  least  amount  of  information  from  landlords  and tenants.    However,  this  methodology  requires  detailed  information  for  the  base  year, which may be increasingly difficult to acquire over time.  In contrast, the MNOI—Ratio Adjustment  calculation  requires  at  least  two  years  of  operating  expense  information, though the two years could be the two most-recently completed years if chosen by the RHC.      The   most   complex   calculation   is   likely   to   be   the   Return   on   Investment methodology,  because  it  requires  analysis  both  of  operating  expenses  and  investment valuation.  

Second,   the   MNOI   and   Return   on   Investment methodologies   treat   landlord’s investments   differently.      The   MNOI   variants   maintain   each   landlord’s   original investment  expectation  by  maintaining  their NOI at  a  level  equal  in  some  form  to  the NOI the   landlord   bargained   for   during   the   base   year.      Notably, MNOI—CPI Adjustment  attempts  to  honor  each  landlord’s  initial  business  agreement  by  providing for  an NOI equal  to  an  amount  the  landlord  bargained  for  prior to  regulation  of rents, adjusted  by  the  CPI.    In  contrast,  the  Return  on  Investment  calculation  applies  a uniform  rate  of  return  on  investment  to  all  landlords,  regardless  of  any  individual landlord’s   prior   business   arrangement.      Accordingly,   each   methodology   treats landlords equally but in different ways and with varying results.  

For  reference purposes,  Table  5  provides  a  summary  of  the  fair  return  standards adopted  by  other  California  jurisdictions.In  addition,  a  memo  further  describing  the various fair return standards is attached to this memo.  

Table 5: Fair Return Standards in California  
| Jurisdiction | Fair Return Standard |  
| --- | --- |  
| Berkeley | MNOI (CPI), adopted by regulation | 
| Santa Monica | MNOI (CPI), adopted by regulation |  
| Los Angeles | MNOI (CPI), adopted by regulation |  
| East Palo Alto | MNOI (CPI), in ordinance |  
| West Hollywood | MNOI (CPI), in ordinance |  
| Beverly Hills | MNOI (CPI), in ordinance |  
| Alameda | List of factors, no specific standard |  
| Oakland | Hybrid MNOI (CPI, plus pass through of some cost increases over prior year) |  
| San Jose | MNOI (CPI), proposed and under revision |  
| San Francisco | MNOI (Ratio), adopted by regulation |  
| Richmond | List of factors, no specific standard |  
| Los Gatos | Increases in operating costs and debt service, no specific standard |  
| Hayward | List of factors, no specific standard, limited pass through increases in debt service |  

# RECOMMENDATION  
Staff recommends the RHCpursue adoption of the MNOI—CPI Adjustment fair return standard  because  it  is  widely  used  in  California,  offers  the  simplest  calculations  for hearing  officers  and  the RHC,  and  maintains  individual  landlords’net  operating income as received prior to regulation of rents.  Table 6 provides a chart comparing the three standard methodologies in support of the staff recommendation.  

Table 6: Summary Analysis of Fair Return Standards  
pending...  

# QUESTIONS FOR RHC CONSIDERATION  

Q1:Does  the RHCwish  to  adopt  a  regulation  setting  forth  the  method  and  a  specific standard  to  be  used  to  calculate  fair  return  in  a  petition  process  for  upward adjustment of rent?  

Q2:If  the RHCwishes  to  adopt  a  fair  return  standard,  which  standard  should  be incorporated into a draft regulation for the RHCto review and consider?  

Q2(a)If  the RHCwishes  to  adopt  either  an  MNOI  variant  or  Fixed  Return  on Investment methodology as the fair returnstandard:  

* How   would   the RHCprefer   to   identify   qualifying   operating expenses   as   compared   to   capital   improvement   costs   that   are precluded from consideration under CSFRA § 1710(a)(3)(C)?  Should regulations  include  a  list  of  common  improvements  that  are either included or excluded from operating expenses?  
* How would the RHCprefer to address anomalies (spikes) in annual operating costs?  Should regulations include a standard amortization schedule for common improvements that provide benefits to tenants for more than one year even though purchased in one year?  

Q2(b)If the RHCwishes to pursue the MNOI—CPI Adjustment methodology to determine  landlords’fair  return  petitions,  then  would  the RHCprefer  to allow NOIto increase with all or a portion of any increase in the CPI?  

Q2(c)If  the RHCwishes  to pursue  the  MNOI—Ratio  Adjustment  methodology to  determine  landlords’fair  return  petitions,  then  would  the RHCprefer to define one base year for all petitions or allow hearing officers to define the appropriate base year on a petition-by-petition basis?  

Q2(d)If the RHCwishes to pursue the Fixed Return on Investment methodology to determine landlords’fair return petitions:  

* Would  the RHCprefer  to  define  the  fixed  rate  of  return  in  the regulations in perpetuity, on annual basis, or at some other interval?  
* What  information  or  factors  would  inform  the RHC’s  determination of a fixed rate of return (i.e.,common rates or indices)?  

Q3How  does  the RHCwish  to  solicit  public  input  for  the  fair  return  standard regulation?  

# FISCAL IMPACT  
The methodology selected could impact the time and costs the hearing officersspend on each  petition,and  therefore,the  budget  of  the  RHC. Staff’s recommendation would result in the most effective methodology to implement.  

# NEXT STEPS  
Based on the RHC’s direction, staff will draft a fair return regulation and return to the RHCat an upcoming meeting.



***
Last updated on 6/30/2017  