<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>

<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
               
	   

## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie Quinn, City Attorney 
### Subject: Annual  General  Adjustment (AGA)  for  Gap  Between  October  19,  2015 and February 2016  
### Date: June 8, 2017  

***

As  you  are  aware,  the  CSFRA  provides  for  annual  general  adjustment  for  rent.    At  its meeting  on  May  22,  2017,  staff  raised  the issue  of  a  gap  in  time  between  October  19, 2015 rent rollback date and the Annual General Adjustment(AGA)recently adopted by the Rental Housing Committee(RHC)for 2017,which covers February 2016 to February 2017.    Staff  sought  direction on whether  the RHC  wished  to  address  this  four-month period.  

Following  the  last  RHC  meeting,  I  had  the  opportunity  to  revisit  the  legal  arguments and comments in support of and against the RHC’s adoption of an adjustment for this gap period.The CSFRA, for whatever reason, does not address this gap period. As you heard  at  the  meeting,  the  proponents  of  the  CSFRA  take  the  position  that  the  charter amendment  does  not  authorize  any  adjustment  in  rent  until  the  2017  AGA  and  then only for the past 12 months. In the recent litigation regarding the CSFRA, the plaintiffs,on behalf of landlords,argued byrolling rents back to October2015 but not providing an adjustment in rent could constitute a taking of property without just compensation.While  there  is  merit  to  both  positions,  the  gap  is  very  limited  in  time,  the  CPI  for November2015  to  February  2016  is  only 0.6  percent,  and  the  effect  of  the  gap  could vary  from  landlord  to  landlord,  depending  upon  the  rent  charged  by  the  landlord  in October2015,  market  conditions,  and  other  factors. In  addition,  a  landlord  has  the ability to file a petition for an upward rent adjustment to recoup any adjustment for this gap  in  the  event  the  landlord  believes  he  or  she  has  not  received  the  fair  return  due under the CSFRA.  

For  these  reasons,  I  recommend  the  RHC  defer  consideration  of  an  AGA  for the  gap period between October 19, 2015 and February 2016 at this time.Staff and the RHC can monitor  the  petitions  being  filed  and  the  impact  of  those  particular  claims  on  the resources  of  the  RHC. Ifthe  hearing  officers  and/or  the  RHC  are  routinely  granting adjustments for that four-month period, then the RHC could consider a regulation with an  across-the-board  adjustment  based  on  these  facts  pursuant  to  Section  1709  (d)(1)  of the  CSFRA. Staff  can  return  to  the  RHC  as  directed  to  provide  updates  on  this  issue. Deferral   of   consideration   of   a   general   adjustment   does   not   foreclose   future consideration by the RHC.  

# FISCAL IMPACT  
The recommended action does not have a fiscal impact to the RHC budget.  

# ALTERNATIVE  
1. Decide  whether  to  adopt  an  AGA  for  thegap  between  October  19,  2015  and February 2016.

***
Last updated on 6/16/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.  
