<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>

<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
               
	   

## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie Quinn, City Attorney & Anky van Deursen, Associate Planner
### Subject: Petition Process Regulations  
### Date: June 8, 2017  

***

# RECOMMENDATION  
Consider Petition  Process Regulations  for  individual  rent  adjustment petitions under the CSFRA.  

# BACKGROUND ANDANALYSIS  
The Rental Housing Committee (RHC) is tasked with a number of duties, includingthe establishment of rules and regulations regarding the implementation of the CSFRA.In this agenda item staff will present draft regulations governing the procedural aspects of filing individual rent adjustmentpetitions under the CSFRA.    

Section 1710 of the CSFRA permits a landlord or a tenant to file a petition with the RHC seeking  adjustment,  either  upward  or  downward,  of  the  rent  for  any  given  tenancy  in accordance  with  the  standards  set  forth  in  the  CSFRA  and  using  the  procedures  set forth  in  Section  1711  and  implementing  regulations.The  RHC  shall  determine  the petition  procedure  and  petition  form  format. These draft regulations establish  the procedure  and  requirements  for  filing a  petition,  includingwho is authorized to  file  a petition;  the  content  of  the  petition forms(the  content  will  change  according  to  which fair  return  standard  will  be  adopted); distinct requirements for  filing  for  each  of  the petitions;   the   right   to   response;   acceptance   of   petitions;   a   prehearing   settlement conference; and a summary of petition processing.

# REQUESTED STAFF DIRECTION  
Staff  requests  the  RHC  review  and  consider  the  draft  Petition  Process  Regulations  for individual  rent  adjustments  under  the  CSFRA.    The  RHC  can  provide  comments  and allow public  inputuntil the  next  RHC  meeting  when  these  Regulations  will  be presented to the RHC for actual adoption.

# FISCAL IMPACT  
Theimplementation  of  a Petition  Processwill not  have  a  fiscal  impact  to  the  RHC budget.  

* PUBLIC NOTICING — Agenda posting.

***
Last updated on 6/16/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.  
