<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>

<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
               
	   

## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie Quinn, City Attorney & Anky van Deursen, Associate Planner
### Subject: Rental Housing Committee Hearing Officer Qualifications and Compensation  
### Date: June 8, 2017  

***
# INTRODUCTION AND ANALYSIS  
Pursuant to Section 1709(d)(4) of the CSFRA, the Rental Housing Committee (RHC) has the power and the duty to appoint Hearing Officers to conduct hearings on Petitions for Individual Rent Adjustments.  

The purpose of this agenda item is to provide the RHC with an overview regarding the use of hearingofficers in other jurisdictions with rent stabilization.  This overview will inform the RHC about what is involved in the appointment of the Hearing Officers.  A comparison  of  Hearing  Officer  qualifications  and  requirements  for  degree/license, experience,   training,   and   Hearing   Officer   compensation   for   other   jurisdictions   is provided in Attachment1 to this Memo.  Based on this review, staff has identified key items  for  the  RHC  to  consider  in  the  selection  and  appointment  of  Hearing  Officers, including  qualifications,  experience,  relationship  between  the  RHC  and  the  Hearing Officers, ease of administration, and the potential costs associated with the appointment of  Hearing  Officers.    Staff’s  recommendations  are  also  provided  for  the  RHC.    Staff seeks direction from the RHC regarding how it would like to structure the appointment of Hearing Officers.  

1. Potential Hearing Officer Qualifications and Experience  
A  survey  of  the  required  qualifications  for  hearing  officer  revealedthey  are  similar  in most jurisdictions. Staff has identified the following items for your consideration:1.Juris Doctor or Equivalent DegreeBecause  the  role  of  the  hearing  officer  is  to  conduct  hearings,  listen  to  evidence, and  apply  the  CSFRA  to  the  evidence  provided  by  the  parties, the jurisdictions surveyed  all require  hearing  officers  to  have  a  law  degree.    Although  having  this degree  is  no  guarantee  of  the  ability  to  apply  the  basic  skills  needed  for  this position, it does indicate training in legal analysis and writing, which are essential skills for the position.  

2. Active  or  Inactive  Membership  in  the  California  State  Bar  in  Good  Standing  or Other State Bar  
Almost  every  other  jurisdiction  requires  State  bar  membership.    Adding  inactive membership  as  an  alternative  ensures  that  retired  attorneys  or  judges  who  might be  good  candidates  but  chose  not  to  remain  active  in the  California  bar,  are  not eliminated.  

3. Experience  
  * Served  as  a  judge,  commissioner,  or  other  judicial  officer  for  more  than  one year;  
  * Served as a hearing officer or administrative law judge or equivalent position for a public entity for more thanthree years;  
  * Served  as  an  arbitrator  and  heard  at  least  five  arbitration  proceedings  that required   hearing   witnesses,   examining   evidence,   and   issuing   a   written decision;  
  * Served as a hearing officer or arbitrator for a binding rental dispute program,and  has  held  that  position  for  more  than  two  years  and  has  issued  written decisions in that position.  
  These experience requirements are applied in most jurisdictions.  Each alternative would  provide  assurance  of  experience  relevant  to  the  tasks  performedby  the Hearing Officers.  The suggested quantitative amounts of experience are designed to ensure that the relevant experience is more than just a token amount.  

4. Complete  a  CSFRA  Training  and  Orientation  Program  Presented  by  the  City  of Mountain View  
This  requirement  is  not  specifically  required  in  every  jurisdiction,  but  it  assures uniform  hearing  officer  performance,  and  conformity  with  the  program  protocols of the CSFRA, particularly since the program is just starting.  

5. Not Currently a Member  of  a Tenant  or Landlord  Advocacy  Group  or Trade Organization  
Only  the  San  Jose  program  has  a  similar  requirement.    However,  this  type  of requirement deserves consideration as a method of assuring Hearing Officers will have  a  neutral  orientation  towardthe  two  populations  subject  to  the  CSFRA.    No further  review  of  prior  affiliations  is  recommended  (to  protect  prior  freedom  of association)  as  long  as  there  is  no  current  membership  in  an  advocacy  group  or trade organization.  

# Staff Recommendation  
Staff recommends  that  the  RHC  require Hearing  Officers  to  have  a  juris  doctor  degree or equivalent, have an active or inactive State bar membership,and possess at least one of the categories of experience as a hearing officer enumerated above.  In addition, staff recommends  all Hearing  Officers  be  provided  with  CSFRA-specific  training  and  that Hearing Officers not be a current member of either a tenant or landlord advocacy group or trade organization.  

# Relationship Between Hearing Officers and the RHC  
The  RHC  has  some  options  to  consider  regarding  legal  relationship  it  establishes  with the Hearing  Officers.The  RHC  or  effectively  the  City  of  Mountain  View  can  hire Hearing  Officers  as  employees. The  RHC  can  also  contract  with Hearing  Officers  or  a third party to provide hearing officer services.  A review of other jurisdictions revealed the Hearing Officer relationship varies:  
* Employee Status  
The  larger  jurisdictions  rely  on  full-time  staff  with  employee  benefits  to  perform this  function. These  jurisdictions  have  a  full  caseload,  guaranteeing  full-time utilization of their hearing officers.  

* Independent Contractor  Status;  Either  Directly  with  the City  or  by Contracting Through a Third-Party Provider  
Smaller   jurisdictions   trend   toward   utilizing   independent   contractors.      The independent  contractor  approach  makes  more  sense  in  any  program  where  the caseload would not support a full-time employee.  

Both   contracting   approaches   have   been   used   by   other   jurisdictions. A   direct independent  contractor  relationship  with  the  RHC  gives  the  RHC  and  the City  more direct  control  over  the  administration  of  the  Hearing  Officer’s  duties,  along  with  the resulting  additional  administrative  burden,  as  opposed  to  giving  that  responsibility, and workload, to a third party.  

The  relationship  can  change  over  time. For  example,  the  RHC  may  initially  wish  to consider   independent   contractor   status   until   such   time   as   the   CSFRA   is   fully implemented and the caseload is more predictable. Once the petition process is up and running, Staff can provide updates to the RHC regarding the number of petitions filedand the number of hearings. The RHC may revisit this issue at any time and consider modifying the relationship.  

# Staff Recommendation  
The costs of the Hearing Officers will be a component of the budget established by the RHC and included in the Rental Housing Fee adopted by the RHC. At this stage of the implementation,staff   recommends   the   RHC   utilize   independent   contractors   for Hearing  Officer services  until  the  caseload  is  established. Project  Sentinel,  a  nonprofit organization,has  experience  with  securing  and  deploying hearing  officers  in  several programs,  and  has  the  capacity  to  provide hearing  officers  on  an  as-needed  basis  for petition hearings under the CSFRA. Project Sentinel is familiar with the community as it  has  been  providinglandlord  tenant  services  to  the  community  for  the  past  30  years and has been fielding calls and assisting both landlords and tenants since the passage of the  CSFRA. Staff  recommends  the  RHC  contract  with  Project  Sentinel  to  provide  the Hearing Officers for a period of one year.Alternatively an RFP process can be initiated, but staff has not been able to locate any other agencies providing similar services.This will allow the RHC to monitor the number of petitions and retain the flexibility to staff in accordance with the number of petitions being filed.  

# Hearing Officer Costs  
The jurisdictions use either a rate per hearing/case or an hourly rate.These costs can be either directly charged tothe petitionerwho uses the petition process and/or it can be included in the budget to be adopted by the RHC later this calendar year.  

Some  jurisdictions  use  a  type  of  flat  rate  per  hearing,  ranging  from  $600  to  $800  per case,   including   the City’s current Rental   Housing   Dispute   Resolution   Program (RHDRP)and the City of Hayward.  In both situations, the applicable ordinance is less complex   than   the   CSFRA,   particularly   in   the   case   of   landlord   petitions.      Other jurisdictions use an hourly rate, but with some type of cap on the number of hours.  The hourly rates in effect range between $150 and $220.  East Palo Alto, whose ordinance is more similar to the CSFRA than the RHDRP, capsthe hourly rate at 10 hours, absent an express   authorization   from   staff   for   additional   compensated   hours   due   to   the complexity  of  a  particular  case.    San  Jose  sets  a  rate  per  hearing,  but  varies  that  rate depending  on  the  number  ofunits  at  issue  and  pays  separately  for  related  activities such as holding a pretrial hearing.  

# Staff Recommendation  
Based on the comparison rates of other Jurisdictions, staff recommendsthe RHC utilize a per-hearing rate and that the rate be based on the type of petition and number of units concerned.    The  rates  should  reflect  reasonable  market-rate  compensation  in  other jurisdictions.  

Recommended rate schedule based on the above factors:  
table pending  

STAFF DIRECTION REQUESTED  
1. Does  the  RHC  want  to  adopt  the  Hearing Officer  Qualifications  as  recommended above or include other qualifications?  
2. Does the RHC want to utilize independent contractors for Hearing Officer services or hire full time employee(s)?  
3. Does  the  RHCwant  to  contract  with  Project  Sentinel  or  another  third  party  to provide Hearing Officers?  
4. Does the RHC want to adopt the fee schedule above or set different fees?  

# FISCAL IMPACT  
The  cost  of  the  Hearing  Officers  will  be  a  component  of  the  RHC  budget.    The  cost recovery  for  the  Hearing  Officers  can either bea  separate  fee  charged directly to petitioners,be a component of the general fee assessed to all landlordsor a combination of both.Staff will return to the RHC with proposals for the RHC budget and fee(s) to be adopted for the implementation and administration of the CSFRA.

# NEXT STEPS  
Staff  will  implement  the  direction  of  the  RHC  to  retain  and  train  Hearing  Officers  so they will be available to hear Individual Rent Adjustment Petitions when the necessary regulations have been promulgated.  



***
Last updated on 6/16/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.  
