<script>
  (function(i,s,o,g,r,a,m){i['GoogleAnalyticsObject']=r;i[r]=i[r]||function(){
  (i[r].q=i[r].q||[]).push(arguments)},i[r].l=1*new Date();a=s.createElement(o),
  m=s.getElementsByTagName(o)[0];a.async=1;a.src=g;m.parentNode.insertBefore(a,m)
  })(window,document,'script','https://www.google-analytics.com/analytics.js','ga');

  ga('create', 'UA-101098054-2', 'auto');
  ga('send', 'pageview');

</script>

<div id="google_translate_element"></div><script type="text/javascript">
function googleTranslateElementInit() {
  new google.translate.TranslateElement({pageLanguage: 'en', includedLanguages: 'es,ru,tl,zh-CN', layout: google.translate.TranslateElement.InlineLayout.SIMPLE, gaTrack: true, gaId: 'UA-101098054-2'}, 'google_translate_element');
}
</script><script type="text/javascript" src="//translate.google.com/translate_a/element.js?cb=googleTranslateElementInit"></script>
               
	   

## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie Quinn, City Attorney & Anky van Deursen, Associate Planner 
### Subject: Hearing Process Regulations  
### Date: June 19, 2017  

***

# RECOMMENDATION  
Consider  Hearing  Process  Regulations  for  individual  rent  adjustment  petitions  under the CSFRA.  

# BACKGROUND AND ANALYSIS  
The Rental Housing Committee (RHC) is tasked with a number of duties, including the establishment of rules and regulations regarding the implementation of the CSFRA.  In this  agenda  item,staff  will  present  draft Regulations governing the  procedural  aspects of  the  hearing  process  of  individual  rent  adjustment  petitions.Inprevious  meetings,the  RHC  heard  presentations  on  the  Petition  Process  and  a  Fair  Return  Standard. Together, thesethree components form the process by which tenants and landlords can petition for an individual upward or downward rent adjustment under the CSFRA.   

Section 1710 of the CSFRA permits a landlord or a tenant to file a petition with the RHC seeking  adjustment,  either  upward  or  downward, of  the  rent  for  any  given  tenancy  in accordance  with  the  standards  set  forth  in  the  CSFRA  and  using  the  procedures  set forth  in  Section  1711  and  implementing  regulations.    The  RHC  shall  determine  the hearing  process.    These  draft Regulations establish  the procedures  for  the  hearing process,  including  authority  of  hearing  officers,  noticing  and  prehearing  procedures, postponement  requests,  conduct  of  the  hearing,  hearing  record,  decision  contents, burden of proof, and appeals to the RHC.  

# REQUESTED STAFF DIRECTION  
Staff  requests  the  RHC  review  and  consider  the  draft  Hearing  Process  Regulations  for individual  rent  adjustments  under  the  CSFRA.    The  RHC  can  provide  comments  and establish  a  timeframe  for  public  input. As  was  briefly  discussed  at  the  June  8,  2017 RHC  meeting,  the  RHC  anticipates  adoption  of  regulations  for  all  three  components (petition, hearing,and fair return standard) once the RHC completes its deliberations on the fair return standard.  

# FISCAL IMPACT  
The  implementation and  administration of  a  these  Hearing  Process  Regulations tocomplete the Petition Process, will either be a component of the RHC budget, a separate fee  charged  to  petitioners,or  a  combination  of  both,  and  will  be  included  in  the  fee ultimately adopted by the RHC once it establishes a budget for the implementation and administration of the CSFRA.  

# PUBLIC NOTICING—Agenda posting.

***
Last updated on 6/16/2017  
Disclaimer: This is not the official site for information on Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee. It was merely copied from [Mountain View's Rental Housing Committee webpage](http://mountainview.gov/council/rental_housing_committee/default.asp). This site simply converts the pdfs into html to allow for a more accessible view.  
