## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie Quinn, City Attorney & Anky van Deursen, Associate Planner & Karen Tiedemann, Special Counsel & Eric S. Phillips, Special Counsel & Justin Bigelow, Special Counsel
### Subject: Draft Regulations for Petition & Hearing Process, Fair Return Standard  
### Date: July 10, 2017  

***

# RECOMMENDATION  
Adopt a Resolution Establishing Regulations for the Petition Process, Hearing Process and a Fair Return Standard for Petitions for Individual Rent Adjustments under the CSFRA.  

# INTRODUCTION  
The purpose of the CSFRA is to promote affordability for renters in the City of Mountain View by controlling excessiverent increases, while ensuring landlords receive a fair and reasonable return on their investments. The CSFRA allows for one annual general rent increase equal to 100% of the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The CSFRA also provides for an individual rent adjustment petition process as a means to balance the benefits and burdens of rent stabilization. Tenants may file a Petition for a Downward Rent Adjustment for (1) failure to maintain habitable premises; (2) a decrease in housing services or maintenance; or (3) if a landlord demands or retains rent in excess of the lawful rent pursuant to the CSFRA. A landlord may file a Petition for Upward Adjustment of Rent to ensure a fair and reasonable rate of return. Adopting a fair return standard for this petition process provides clarity, transparency and consistency of decisions for Petitions for Upward Adjustment of Rent.  

# BACKGROUND
Section 1710 and 1711 of the CSFRA charges the RHC with promulgating regulationsto clarify the petition process and ensure rents are set to allow for a landlord’s fair return. Petitions will be heard and decided by hearing officers and may be appealed to the RHC.  

In its meetings on May 22, June 8 and June 19, 2017, the Rental Housing Committee had the opportunity to discuss the concept of a fair return standard, hear input from the community and also receive input solicited from stakeholders. On June 19, 2017, the RHC directed staff to draft a fair return standard regulation that maintains the net operating income received from a property in the years prior to adoption of the CSFRA by increasing the net operating income in accordance with changes to the consumer price index. The RHC also provided direction to staff to review the draft definitions of capital improvements and amortization schedule and provide further information regarding a potential "Vega adjustment" regulation, which would allow for further adjustments to the net operating income to which a property owner is entitled.  

# ANALYSIS  
Together, the proposed regulations for a petition process, hearing process and fair return standard set forth the necessary procedures and requirements for processing Petitions for Individual Rent Adjustments, and once adopted will allow the RHC to begin accepting and processing such petitions. Staff drafted the proposed regulations to provide clear and easy to follow guidance to create a basic, yet effective process to address Petitions for Upward Adjustment of Rent and Petitions for Downward Adjustment of Rent. The RHC may change or add to these regulations at any time, depending on experiences during implementation of the petition process. The current proposal includes provisions regarding who is authorized to file a petition, the content of the petition forms, and distinct requirements for the filing of each of the petitions, the right to respond, acceptance of petitions, a prehearing settlement conference and a summary of petition processing. These draft regulations also establish further procedures for the hearing process, including authority of hearing officers, noticing and prehearing procedures, postponement requests, conduct of the hearing, hearing record, decision contents, burden of proof, and appeals to the RHC.  

__Petition Process__  
Staff made the following edits to the Petition Process Regulations, taking into account the RHC’s feedback as well as written comments:  
* Section A(2) and A(3): single parcel is further specified as “single parcel of land or lot:  
* Section B(1): any person ororganization can be a representative of the petitioner.  
* Section E, F, G, and H headings are brought into conformity with language of the CSFRA.  
* Section E & F: Notice to Landlord brought into conformity with language of the CSFRA.  
* Section I: Clarification to what addresses notices should be sent.  
* Section K(4).: Switching text to make this section easier to read.  
* Section L(1): Deleted, but can be re-instated pursuant to a future direction of the RHC.  
* Section  N:  Pursuant  to  a  letter  from  Juliet  Brodie  to  theRHC,  changed  the  prehearing settlement conference into a voluntary part of the process.  

Staff has the following questions related to the Petition Process Regulations and Section C:  
* Does the RHC want to provide petition forms in Mandarin and Spanish as well as English, which would require the hiring of translators for petition forms and documents? Moreover, how does the RHC want to address hearings with individuals who are not proficient in English?  

__Hearing Process__  
While the Hearing Process Regulations were included in the agenda packet for June 19, the item was not discussedand was continued to the July 10, 2017 meeting. Staff has made the following edits to the Hearing Process Regulations, taking into account written comments received:  
* Section E(4): A section on Rules of Evidence was added to make clear that the formal rules of evidence do not applyin the administrative proceeding.  
* Section F(2)(b)(iv): The last sentence relating to fixed rate of return was eliminatedbased on the direction provided by the RHC regarding the fair return standard.  

__Fair Return Standard__  
The fair return standard as described in these regulations is based on the most commonly used standard in California: the Maintenance of Net Operating Income (MNOI) as adjusted by the Consumer Price Index (CPI). The basic steps to calculate a landlord’s fair return for a rental property under the MNOI – CPI Adjustment method are outlined below.

| 1 | Take the landlord’s gross income and total qualified operating expenses for the property from the base year to calculate the base year net operating income (NOI). |
| --- | --- |  
| 2 | Take the current (petition) year’s gross income and total qualified operating expenses for the property to calculate the petition year NOI. | 
| 3 | Identify the percentage change in the CPI between the base year and the petition year. | 
| 4 | Increase the base year NOI by the percentage change in the CPI. (The Landlord’s NOI should increase by the percentage change in the CPI to maintain the annual value of the base year NOI.) | 
| 5 | Compare the petition year NOI with the adjusted base year NOI that accounts for the CPI change. |
| 6 | If the petition year NOI is less than the base year NOI adjusted by the CPI - increase, then the landlord is entitled to an upward adjustment of rents for that property so that the petition year NOI equals the base year NOI adjusted by the CPI increase. |

By comparing both the gross income and operating expenses for one property for a base year and petition year, the MNOI - CPI Adjustment method of allowing landlords to earn a fair return maintains the value of the landlord's net operating income. This methodology acknowledges increases in operating expenses (like maintenance costs and utilities) while regulating rent increases. The draft Fair Return Regulations follow this basic formula.  

During its June 19 meeting, the RHC requested alternatives related to specific components of the draft Fair Return Regulations. Each option, as well as an explanation of some notable provisions of the draft Fair Return Regulations that accommodate the text of the CSFRA are discussed below based on the order in which they appear in the draft Fair Return Regulations.  

An example of how to perform the necessary calculations consistent with the proposed Net Operating Income standard is included as Attachment 5. As shown in the example, a landlord would provide evidence of their gross income generated by a particular property during the base year. The base year gross income would be  reduced by operating expenses; however, only permitted operating expenses may be deducted. Moreover, any operating expenses that are capital improvements must beamortized over the life of such  improvement. Following the deduction of operating expenses from gross income, the Net Operating Income for the base year is then adjusted upward by the same percentage as the increase in the CPI to arrive at the Net Operating Income for the petition year. The landlord would provide evidence of their gross income in the petition year, and operating expense would be deducted (subject to the same limitations as discussed above with regard to the base year operating expenses). In the example, the adjusted Base Year NOI is greater than the actual NOI in the petition year, so the landlord is awarded a rent increase, allocated among all of the rental units at the subject property.  

1. Index for the Fair Return Standard (Sections B and C(4))  
The RHC requested options regarding the index to be used for the Fair Return Regulations. The draft Fair Return Regulations reflect the staff recommendation that the RHC use the Consumer Price Index – All Items for All Urban Consumers (CPI – All Items) for the San Francisco-Oakland-San Jose metropolitan area. However, the RHC could select another index, such as the Consumer Price Index – Housing (CPI –Housing), which is one component of the CPI – All Items. Because CPI – Housing reflects changes in the cost of fewer goods and services than CPI – All Items, the CPI – Housing is a less-stable index. Attachment 6 provides a comparison of the CPI – All Items and CPI – Housing indices over the past seven years. As can be seen in this attachment, CPI – Housing changes at a faster rate from CPI – All Items, and the use of CPI – Housing would be subject to more fluctuations than under the use of CPI – All Items. This variation between the indices used for purposes of fair return petitions and annual general adjustments would not further the purposes of the CSFRA, because it would lead to less stable rents and potentially increase the number of fair return petitions.  
Staff is unaware of any jurisdiction that uses an MNOI – CPI Adjustment fair return standard but does not use the CPI – All  Items index.  Berkeley, East Palo Alto, Los Angeles, Santa Monica, and West Hollywood each use the CPI – All Items index for purposes of calculating fair return. To comport with other jurisdictions that use MNOI, and to better implement the CSFRA, staff recommends that the RHC adopt the CPI – All Items index to align the annual general adjustment and fair return components of the CSFRA.  
*Question: Does the RHC desire to accept the staff recommendation and use the CPI – All Items for purposes of the Fair Return standard?*  

2. Percentage of Index for the Fair Return Standard (Section B)The RHC requested options regarding the percentage of the change to the preferred index to be used  for  the  Fair  Return Regulations.    The  draft  Regulations  reflect  the  staff  recommendation that  the  RHC  allow  for  one  hundred  percent  (100%)  of  the  CPI –All  Items  index  be  used  to adjust a landlord's Net Operating Income from the base year to the petition year.  Notably, some jurisdictions allow net operating income to increase by one hundred percent (100%) of CPI All Items (Los Angeles & East Palo Alto), while others limit the increase to a fraction of CPI – All Items  (for  example,  Berkeley  allows  65%  of  CPI –All  Items,  West Hollywood  and  Santa Monica  allow  40%  of  CPI –All  Items).  Staff  is  unaware  of  any  jurisdiction  that  allows  net operating income to increase by more than one hundred percent of the chosen index.  Moreover, Section 1707(a)(1) of the CSFRA limits the annual general adjustment to one hundred percent of the  change  in  CPI.    Allowing  for  greater  increases  through  the  petition  process  may  limit  the impact  of  Section  1707(a)  of  the  CSFRA  and  encourage  landlords  to  file  a  more  petitions  to avoid the limits of Section1707 of the CSFRA.  
*Question: Does the RHC desire to accept the staff recommendation and use one hundred percent of the chosen index?*

3. Base Year (Section C(1))  
The RHC requested options regarding the base  year to be used for the Fair Return Regulations.  Generally,  the  base  year  should  reflect  market  conditions  before  implementation  of  a  new  rent stabilization  law.    Staff  recommends  that  the  RHC  select  either  2014  or  2015  as  the  base  year, because both years are recent (so landlords likely possess or could retrieve documents related to gross income and operating expenses for those years).  The theory is that each landlord obtained a  net  operating  income  for  each  property  in  2014  or  2015  that  was  unaffected  by  the  CSFRA.  Because  such  rents  were  unaffected  by  the  CSFRA  and  set  at  a  level  chosen  by  individual landlords, it is assumed that the net operating income collected during the base  year provided a fair  return  to  the  landlord.  Accordingly,  the  draft  Fair  Return  Regulations  would  maintain  the value of each landlord's net operating income as received in the base year.  The selection of 2014 as the base year would likely result in lower gross income from lower rental rates, but would also reflect  greater  change in  the CPI between the base and petition  years.   Selection of 2015  as the base year would reflect a smaller change in CPI but potentially greater rental incomes.  
*Question: What  year  does  the  RHC  desire  to  use  as  the  base  year  for  purposes  of maintaining a landlord's net operating income?*  

4. Management Expenses (Section E(1)(g))  
Management  expenses  are  a  typical  component  of  operating  expenses,  whether  a  property  is landlord-managed  or  managed  by  a  third-party.    However,  it  can  be  difficult  to  ascertain  the value   of   a   landlord's   self-management   services.      Accordingly,   many   jurisdictions   define reasonable management expenses as a fraction or percentage of the gross income received from a property.  For instance, Berkeley and Santa Monica presume management expenses equal to five percent  (5%)  of  a  property's  annual  gross  income  are  reasonable,  while  West  Hollywood presumes  six  percent  (6%)  is  reasonable.    Landlords  may  still  demonstrate  that  a  management expenses for a property costs more than five or six percent of the gross income received from a property,  but  the  presumption  is  often  helpful  for  self-managed  properties.    Staff  recommends that the RHC adopt a rebuttable presumption that six percent (6%) of the gross income received from a property is a reasonable operating expense.

5. Reasonable Capital Reserve   Account   as   Component   of   Operating   Expenses(Section E(1)(i))  
The CSFRA prohibits the inclusion of debt service (principal, interest, and fees) for certain debt incurred  after  October 19, 2015.   Likewise, members of the public have expressedconcern that rent  stabilization  may  provide  a  disincentive  for  landlords  to  maintain  or  improve  regulated residential  rental  properties.    To  address  these  two  issues,  staff  recommends  that  landlords  be allowed  to  include  a  reasonable  capital  reserve  account  as  one  component  of  the  operating expenses  for  a  property,  so  long  as  the  funds  function  as  reserve  accounts  (e.g.  the  reserve accounts are segregated from other funds and remain relatively liquid so that they may be used to pay  for  anticipated  or  unexpected  expenses).    Staff  is  unaware  of  any  other  jurisdiction  that allows for a property reserve account as an element of qualifying operating expenses but believes it addresses public concerns and promotes a prudent business practice among landlords.  

6. Certain Debt Service Excluded from Operating Expenses (Section E(2)(e))Section 1710 of the CSFRA prohibits the inclusion of debt service (principal, interest, and fees) for certain debt incurred after October 19, 2015.  The draft Regulations follow the prohibition in the  CSFRA.    Notably,  other  jurisdictions  exclude  all  debt  service  in  the  fair  return  context.  Excluding  all  debt  service  would  be  an  easier  rule  to  implement  and  may  reduce  impacts  to tenants  related  to  the  creditworthiness  of  their  landlord  (e.g.  less  creditworthy  landlords  may have higher operating costs based on access to capital and interest rates).  
*Question:  Does the RHC desire to include debt service as one factor when reviewing fair return petitions to the extent authorized by the CSFRA?*  

7. Anomalous Operating Expenses (Section E(3))  
Fair  return  calculations  based  on  the  maintenance  of  net  operating  income  require  analysis  of operating  expenses  to  ensure  that  they  reasonably  reflect  an  average  year.    In  recognition  that annual operating  expenses  may  vary  greatly  from  one  year  to  the  next,  the  draft  Regulations provide  Hearing  Officers  with  the  authority  to  adjust  operating  expenses  in  the  petition  year  if the expenses are unreasonably low or high.  Unfortunately, there is no easily referenced standard for operating expenses and so Hearing Officers often rely on the best information available such as  information  about  prevailing  costs  provided  by  landlords  and  tenants  during  the  petition  and hearing process.  

8. Capital Improvements and Amortization Schedule (Sections F(1)(a) and (E(1)(h))  
The CSFRA greatly constrains how the costs of capital improvements are addressed.  Consistent with  the  CSFRA,  the  draft  Regulations  include  consideration  of  a  landlord's  cost  of  making additions  and  modifications  to  a  property  that  are  necessary  to  maintain  compliance  with specified building standards in connection with a Petition for Upward Adjustment of Rent.  
The draft Regulations propose to allow the cost of complying with the building codes contained in Mountain View City Code Section 25.58 to be included as an operating cost when calculating net operating income.   This code section identifies physical standards necessary to preserve the basic  health  and  safety  of  housing  units  in  the  City,  and  it  is  included  as Attachment 7.  Likewise, the City building standards incorporate the  International Property  Maintenance Code, which  is  also  included  as Attachment8.    In  addition,  the  Regulations  propose  to  include improvements  to  properties  made  to  comply  with the  California  Green  Building  Standards  as codified in Chapter 4 (Residential Mandatory Measures) of Part 11 of Title 24 of the California Code of Regulations in operating costs, which is included as Attachment9.  Property repairs or improvements  identified  in  any  of  the  aforementioned  codes  would  be  presumed  to  qualify  as operating expenses in compliance with the CSFRA, which requires that capital improvements be necessary  to  comply  with  health  and  safety  codes.    The  City  is  considering  the adoption  of  its own   green   building   standards,   and   Staff   recommends   that   the   RHC   consider   allowing improvements  made  pursuant  to  this  code  section  as  a  capital  improvement  be  included  in operating expenses once the standards are enacted.  
Moreover, staff recommends that the cost of qualifying capital improvements be included as one component  of  the  operating  expenses  for  the  property  that  was  improved.    However,  to  avoid large rent increases that would result if the entire cost of a capital improvement were included in one  year  and  to  acknowledge  that  the  useful  life  of  a  capital  improvement  is  longer  than  one year, staff recommends that the RHC adopt an amortization schedule for categories and specific types  of  capital  improvements.    By  dividing  the  costs of  qualifying  capital  improvements  over multiple  years,  landlords  would  be  able  to  pass-through  the  costs  of  improvements  over  the useful life of the improvement without defeating the purpose of the CSFRA, which is to stabilize rents.  

9. Amortization of Capital Improvements (Section F(3))  
As  discussed  above  with  respect  to (Section  E(1)(h),  it  is  appropriate  to  amortize  the  cost  of permissible  capital  improvements  over  the  life  of  such  improvements  to  permit  a  landlord  to recover  such  costs  without  unfairly  burdening  tenants  by  rapidly  increasing  rents.    The  draft Regulations  include  a  proposed  amortization  schedule  as  an  attachment,  to  allow  the  RHC  to easily   amend   the   schedule   without   needing   to   modify   the   Regulations   themselves(see attachment  10).    Moreover,  the  amortization  schedule  will  provide  clear  guidance  to  landlords, tenants,  and  hearing  officers  with  regard  to  what  type  of  investments  are  eligible  capital improvements  for  consideration  in  connection  with  a  petition  for  Upward  Adjustment  of  Rent and how quickly such costs may be recovered.  

10. Base Year Presumption and “Vega Adjustment” (Section G)  
Fair  return  calculations  based  on  the  maintenance  of  net  operating  income  require  analysis  of base  year net operating income, which is comprised of the base  year gross income less the base year operating expenses.  The purpose of the base  year is to define a timeframe during which a landlord’s net operating income is presumed to be fair (for instance, because the landlord had the ability  to  pursue  an  acceptable  net  operating  income  during  the  base  year  free  from  rent stabilization laws).  The presumption that base year net operating income was fair is rebuttable; landlords   can   demonstrate   that   the   base   year   net   operating   income   for   a   property   was unreasonably low because gross income was unreasonably low, and so maintaining that level of net operating income in future years would be unfair.  
Adjusting base year gross income because it is unreasonably low is often referred to as a “Vega Adjustment"  becauseof  a  1990  court  case.    In  that  case,  Vega  v.  City  of  West  Hollywood (Vega), West Hollywood was required to revise the base year gross income when implementing rent  stabilization  based  on  the  maintenance  of  net  operating  income.1West  Hollywood's ordinance  allowed  for  base  year  gross  income  to  be  adjusted  if  income  was  "disproportionately low" due to  "peculiar  circumstances."  West  Hollywood had not defined  what income qualified as  "disproportionately  low,"  which  lead  to  a  complicated  hearing  process  and  ultimately, litigation.  
Although  there  is  a  legal  obligation  to  allow  a  landlord  to  demonstrate  that  the  base  year  gross income  for  a  property  was  unreasonably  low,  staff  recommends  the  RHC  define  a  standard  by which landlords can demonstrate gross income was unreasonably low.  
After the Vega case, some jurisdictions defined unreasonably low gross income by referring to a standard amount of rent per unit.  For instance, Berkeley defines gross income from a property as unreasonably  low  if  the  base  year  gross  income  is  less  than  seventy-five  percent  (75%)  of  the income that would be received for the building if the landlord charged rents defined by the U.S. Department  Housing  and  Urban  Development  (HUD).    HUD  publishes  two  different  rent standards  based  on  the  number  of  bedrooms  in  a  unit,  which  are  used  for  subsidized  housing.  HUD publishes fair market rents annually for each county as well as small area fair market rents for  zip  codes.    HUD  fair  market  rents  and  small  area  fair  market  rents  for  2014  and  2015  are included in Attachment 11and offer one easily understood measure of unreasonably low income.  
*Question:    Does  the  RHC  wish  to  identify  a  standard  to  define  unreasonably  low  base year gross income?  If so, should the standard relate to HUD fair market rents?*  

11. Base Year Records (Sections I and H)In order to maintain net operating income, Hearing Officers and the RHC must ascertain the net operating income from the property in the base year.  Section I of the draft Regulations requires landlords to maintain records that demonstrate the gross income and operating expenses for each property  that  contains  a  rent  stabilized  unit.    In  anticipation  that  adequate  records  may  not  be available in all circumstances, Section H of the draft Regulations allow for the estimation of base year operating expenses based on the best information available.  Such information could include records for similar properties, whether owned by the same landlord or another party.  
  
# FISCAL IMPACT  
The adopted regulations will be used to determine the time and consequently the costs the Hearing Officers spend on each petition, and therefore, the budget of the RHC.  

***
Last updated on 7/6/2017  