## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Jannie Quinn, City Attorney & Anky van Deursen, Associate Planner 
### Subject: Reimbursement  of Funding  Advancedby  the  City  to  Implement  the CSFRA  
### Date: July 10, 2017  

***

# RECOMMENDATION  
Acknowledge report and forthcoming request from the City Council for reimbursement of advanced funding.

# BACKGROUND  
In accordance with Section 1709 (j)(2) of the Community Stabilization and Fair Rent Act (CSFRA), the City of Mountain View has advanced funding and used City resources to implement the CSFRA.  Section 1709 (j)(2) provides:  

> “During the initial implementation of this Article, the City shall advance all necessary  funds  to  ensure  the  effective  implementation  of  this  Article,  until the  Committee  has  collected  Rental  Housing  Fees  sufficient  to  support  the implementation  of  this  Article.    The  City  may  seek  a  reimbursement  of  any advanced funds  from  the Committee after the Rental Housing Fee  has been collected.  

As the Rental Housing Committee (RHC) commences  its efforts to adopt a budget, the City  would  like  the  RHC  to  be  aware  of  the  funds  advanced  to  date  by  the  City, including staffing costs for the implementation of the CSFRA, and that the City will be seeking reimbursement of those funds through the RHC budget process.  

# ANALYSIS  
The  City  appropriated  $362,000  of  funding  in  Fiscal  Year  2016-17  to  fund  2.0  full-time positions dedicated to the implementation of the CSFRA, along with various office and contract service costs.  Any unspent funds as of the end of the 2016-17 fiscal year have been requested to be carried forward into the current (2017-18) fiscal year.  In addition, funding    for    3.0    full-time    positions    and    additional    implementation    costs    of approximately  $499,000  has  been  appropriated  for  the  first  six  months  of  the  current fiscal year, from July 1, 2017 to December 31, 2017.  This does not include indirect cost for   staff   in   City   Departments   (such as  City  Attorney’s  Office,  Finance  and Administrative Services Department, City Manager’s Office, etc.).  The direct costs were included  in  the  City’s  budget  for  Fiscal  Year  2017-18,  in  anticipation  of  the  RHC’s adoption of a budget and Rental Housing Fee,and the collection of the Fee beginning in January 2018.  

When the RHC was appointed and began meeting, it became clear that additional staff resources and legal services specializing in rent stabilization were needed to sustain the workload  involved  in staffing  the  RHC,  preparing  the  agenda  packets,  drafting  the regulations  required  to  implement  and  administer  the  CSFRA,  setting  up  intake procedures,  obtaining  hearing  officer  and  other  contract  services,  holding  public  input meetings,  and  performing  other  tasks  as  needed  for  CSFRA  implementation.    On  June 20, the City Council included an additional appropriation to augment staff resources by 1.0  FTE  during  the  implementation  of  the  CSFRA  until  the  Rental  Housing  Feeis collected in January 2018.  

The following table summarizes the items that the City Council has approved to date:  

Table 1: Items Approved by City Council to date for Fiscal Year(FY) 2016-17 andFY 2017-18  

FY2016-17 Budget Appropriations:  $362,000  

| Services | Costs | Description | 
| --- | --- | --- | 
| 1.0 FTE Associate Planner | $61,000 | This is an ongoing position.  The appropriated amount covers the remainder of FY2016-17, approximately 4.5 months. |
| 1.0 FTE Office Assistant II | $41,000 | This is an ongoing position.  The appropriated amount covers the remainder ofFY 2016-17, approximately 4.5 months. | 
| Outside Professional Services | $155,000 | Includes services to assist in CSFRA implementation, serve as “first point of contact,” facilitate public outreach and workshops, and implement Tenant Relocation Assistance Ordinance. | 
| Computer Equipment andSoftware | $75,000 | Identification, development, and implementation of registry/database, as directed by the RHC. | 
| General Office, Materials, andNotices | $30,000 | Education, outreach, and communications; RHC meeting packets, noticing for meetings, development and printing of collateral, outreach, and stakeholder meetings. |  

FY 2017-18 Appropriations:  $499,400 (in addition to prior fiscal year rebudgets) (These amounts are intended to cover the costs necessary to implement the CSFRA for the first 6 months of FY 2017-18 until the RHC collects a Rental Housing Fee)  

| Services | Costs | Description | 
| --- | --- | --- | 
| Computer Equipment andSoftware | $50,000 net new ($125,000 total) | $50,000 + $75,000 rebudget from FY2016-17 midyear appropriations = $50,000 net new. |
| 1.0 FTE Associate Planner | $81,500 | This is an ongoing position.  The appropriated amount covers the first 6 months of FY 2017-18. | 
| 1.0 FTE Office Assistant II | $54,500 | This is an ongoing position.  The appropriated amount covers the first 6 months of FY 2017-18. | 
| 1.0 FTE Administrative Analyst I/II | $78,400 | This is an ongoing position.  The appropriated amount covers the first 6 months of FY 2017-18. | 
| Third-party legal services | $75,000 | The appropriated amount covers the first 6 months of FY 2017-18. | 
| General Office and Noticing | $40,000 net new ($60,000 total) | $40,000 + $20,000 rebudget from FY 2016-17 midyear appropriations = $40,000 net new. | 
| “First Point of Contact” Services | $60,000 | --- | 
| Hearing Officer | $30,000 | --- | 
| Hearing Officer Training | $20,000 | --- | 
| Tenant TRAO Eligibility Assessment andLandlord Compliance | $10,000 | --- | 
| Total Appropriated to Date | $861,400 | --- |  

To date, the City has advanced to the CSFRA Fund $861,400 for the implementation of the CSFRA.  In addition to these direct costs, there are indirect costs for other City staff that aresupporting   the   CSFRA   implementation.    As   authorized   by   the   charter amendment,  the  City  will  present  a  formal  request  for  reimbursement  to  the  RHC  of these  costs  as  well  as  other  expenses  incurred,  if  any,  by  the  City  to  implement  the CSFRA as part of the RHC’s budget process.  In advance of this formal request, the City Council requested staff to communicate to the RHC the amount of these appropriations, the  City’s  expectation  of  receiving  reimbursement,  and  the  City’s  interest  in  being reimbursed as expeditiously as possible.  

# FISCAL IMPACT  
The  City  has  advanced  and  appropriated  $861,400  to  the  CSFRA  Fund  for  direct  staff and other costs for the implementation of the CSFRA.  There are other indirect costs that will  be  in  addition  to  the  direct  cost.    In  accordance  with  the  charter  amendment, the City will request reimbursement for these costs by the RHC.  

# PUBLIC NOTICING—Agenda posting.



***
Last updated on 7/6/2017  