## City of Mountain View
## Memorandum
### To: Rental Housing Committee
### From: Patty J. Kong, Finance and Administrative Services Director  
### Subject: Budget Introduction  
### Date: August 28, 2017  

***

# PURPOSE  
The purpose of this agenda item is to initiate the budget process so the RHC can fulfill its obligation to establish a budget for the reasonable and necessary implementation of the CSFRA, including without limitation the hiring of necessary staff, and the charging of fees in an amount sufficient to support that budget.  

At the Rental Housing Committee (RHC) meeting on August 28, 2017, staff will provide the RHC with an introduction to the budget.

# BACKGROUND AND ANALYSIS  
Section 1709 (j)of the CSFRA provides:  

Financing. The Committee shall finance its reasonable and necessary expenses, including without limitation engaging any staff as necessary to ensure implementation of this Article, by charging Landlords an annual Rental Housing Fee as set forth herein, in amounts deemed reasonable by the Committee in accordance with applicable law. The Committee is also empowered to request and receive funding when and if necessary from any available source including the City for its reasonable and necessary expenses.  

The budget presentation will provide a high level introduction of the City of Mountain View’s budget in order to inform the RHC regarding the preparation of its own budget. Staff will also present some background information on the budget components, along with the budget process and timeline. In future meetings, the RHC will provide direction on the expenditures to be included in the initial budget of the RHC for this fiscal year, review a proposed budget and adopt a budget.  

The Rental Housing Impact Fee will be calculated based on the budget established by the RHC.  


***
Last updated on 7/20/2017  