## City of Mountain View
## Rental Housing Committee
### Interim Petition Regulations
### Date: June 8, 2017  

***

| Chapter | Title |
| --- | --- | 
| Chapter 1 | General | 
| Chapter 2 | Definitions | 
| Chapter 3 | Rules of Conduct | 
| **Chapter 4** | **Petition Process** | 
| Chapter 5 | Hearings Procedure | 
| Chapter 6 | Fair Return | 
| Chapter 7 | Rental Housing Fee | 
| Chapter 8 | --- | 
| Chapter 9 | --- | 

## CHAPTER 4  
## HEARING PROCEDURE 

A. Petition Purpose  
B. Authority to File a Petition  
C. Petition Forms  
D. Petition Requirements: All Petitions  
E. Petition Requirements: Rent Reduction for Habitability of Premises  
F. Petition Requirements:Rent Reduction for Reduced Housing Services  
G. Petition Requirements: Rent Reduction for Unlawful Rents  
H. Petition Requirements: Rent Increase  
I. Petitioner Notice of Submission  
J. Consolidation of Petitions  
K. Petition Response  
L. Acceptance of Petition for Upward Rent Adjustment  
M. Acceptance of Petitions: Dismissal Prohibited  
N. Prehearing Settlement Conference  
O. Summary of Petition Processing  

## Petition Purpose  
1. Any Landlord, Tenant, group of Tenants, or an authorized representative, who seeks an Individual Rent Adjustment (e.g., an increase or decrease in Rent for one or more Rental Units) must file a Petition for an Individual Rent Adjustment under this Chapter on a form provided by the Rental Housing Committee.  
2. A Petition may request an Individual Rent Adjustment for one or more Rental Units. If the Petition requests an Individual Rent Adjustment for more than one Rental Unit, then the Petition may not apply to more Rental Units than the total number of Rental Units located on a single parcel.  
3. Notwithstanding Subsection (2) of Section (A), if more than one physical structure contains Rental Units on a single parcel, then one Petition may be limited to apply only to the Rental Units contained in one of the separate physical structures on the parcel.  

## Authority to File a Petition  
A Petition for an Individual Rent Adjustment may be filed by a Landlord, Tenant, or group of Tenants of one or more Rental Units that are subject to the CSFRA, or by an authorized representative of a party eligible to file a Petition.  
1. Representation or Assistance to File a Petition.    Any  party  eligible  to  file  a Petition   may   seek   the   assistance   of   or   representation   by   an   attorney, Recognized  Tenant  Organization,  Landlord,or  Tenant  advocacy  group,  or any other person or organization designated by the party.2.Required  Documentation.    To  be  recognized  as  an  authorized  representative of   a   party   filing   a   Petition,   the   representative   must   file   an   official authorizationform provided by the Rental Housing Committee that is signed by   each   party   seeking   representation   and   expressly   authorizing   the representative  to  act  on  behalf  of  the  party  with  respect  to  the  Petition.    The same form may provide continued authorization during a Hearing and/or an appeal that results from the Petition.  If the party filing a petition is a group of Tenants,  then  an  authorized  representative  will  be  authorized  to  represent only those Tenants who sign and expressly authorize the representativeto act on their behalf. 

C.Petition Forms1.Form  Required.    Any Petitionerseeking  an  Individual  Rent  Adjustment under  this  chapter  must  do  so  on  a  form  provided  by  the  Rental  Housing Committee, with supporting documentation as described in Section D.2.Incomplete  Petition  Forms.    Receipt  of  a  Petition  does  not  mean  the  Petition has   been   accepted   by   the   Rental   Housing   Committee,   or   its   designee.  Petitions  must  meet  the  requirements  set  forth  in  this  chapter  prior  to acceptance.  A Petition submitted for an Individual Rent Adjustment will not be   accepted   if   the   Petition   is   illegible,   incomprehensible,   erroneously completed,  or  incomplete.    Submitted  Petitions  that  are  not  accepted  will  be returned to the Petitioner and no further action will be taken.D.Petition Requirements: All Petitions1.Documentary  Evidence.    Petitioner  must  provide  copies  of  all  documentary evidence  that Petitioner expects  to  present  at  the  hearing.    Such  copies  must be  clear,  legible,  easily  readable,  and  organized  by  category,  following  the organization of the petition format. 2.Witness  List.    Petitioner  must  include  a  witness  list  and  provide  the  name, address,  and  subject  matter(s)  of  testimony  of  any  person  the Petitioner expects to testify on behalf of the Petitioner.3.Disclosure  of  Intended  Expert  Testimony.   If the Petitionerintends to  call  an expert  witness  to  offer  an  expert  opinion  at  the  hearing, Petitioner must provide  the  name  of  each  expert  witness  and  must  also  include  a  brief narrative  statement  setting forth  the  qualifications  of  the  expert  and  the general  substance  of  the  expected  expert  testimony.    If  an  expert  witness report  will  be  submitted  at  the  hearing  (e.g.,an  economic  analysis,  property appraisal,  or  property  inspection  report),  one  copy  of  the  report  must  be submitted  either  together  with  the  Petition  or  at  least  ten  (10)  business  days prior to the  hearing.4.Untimely  Submissions.    All  documents,  reports,  writings,  and  testimony  not submitted or disclosed when submitting the Petition, or with respect to expert witness  reports  that  are  not  disclosed  at  least  ten  (10)  business  days  prior  to the hearing, will be excluded from evidence in any hearing, except upon good cause shown for late submission or nondisclosure.  5.Proof  of  Notice.    Petitioner  must  provide  proof  of  delivery  of  notice  to opposing party with submission of Petition, as described in Section I.  

E.Petition Requirements: Rent Reduction for Habitability of PremisesA Petition for an Individual Rent Adjustment that would reduce Rent based on an alleged failure to maintain habitable premises must include:1.City Report.  A copy of any relevant City code inspection report from the City of   Mountain   View   department   responsible   for   the   residential   rental inspection program;2.Valuation.  Petitioner’s determination of the estimated value of the failure to maintain habitable premises,including the basis for any such determination;3.Dates.  The dates when the failure began and ended, if applicable; 4.Agreement.  A copy of the Rental Housing Agreement, if available; and5.Rents.  The amount of the Base Rent and Current Rent.F.Petition Requirements: Rent Reductionfor Reduced Housing ServicesA Petition for an Individual Rent Adjustment that would reduce Rent based on an alleged reduction in Housing Services, including maintenance, must include:1.Explanation.  A statement setting forth the nature of the decrease in Housing Services  or  failure  of  maintenance  for  which  the  downward  adjustment  is sought and the date on which the Landlord was given notice of the conditions or  problems,  or  the  timeframe  in  which  the  Landlord  had  knowledge  or should  have  had  knowledge  of  the  conditions  or  problems,  providing  the basis for the petition;2.30-Day  Notice  to  Landlord.    A  copy  of  a  written  notice  to  the  Landlord identifying  the  reduction  in  Housing  Services  or  failure  of  maintenance  and request  for  remediation,  and  a  declaration  that  the Petitionerserved  this written  notification  on  the  Landlord  at  least  thirty  (30)  days  before  filing  a Petition and no remediation of the condition or services has occurred;3.Valuation.    Petitioner’s  determination  of  the  estimated  valueof  the  decrease in Housing Services or failure to maintain the premises including the basis for such determination;4.Dates.    The  dates  when  the  decrease  in  Housing  Services  or  failure  to maintain the premises began and ended, if applicable;

5.Agreement.  A copy of the Rental Housing Agreement, if available; and6.Rents.  The amount of the Base Rent and Current Rent.G.Petition Requirements: Rent Reduction for Unlawful RentsA Petition for an Individual Rent Adjustment that would reduce Rent based on the alleged collection of unlawful Rents must include:1.Itemization  of  Payments.    An  itemization  of  each  payment  to  the  Landlord that  includes  excessive  or  unlawful  rents.    Each  itemization  should  identify each of the following:a.the  approximate  date  of  payment  and  the  dates  for  which  the  payment was applicable;b.the  form  of  payment  (e.g.,cash,  electronic  funds  transfer,  goods,  or services);c.the Landlord to whom the Payment was made (e.g.,current or previous Landlord of Rental Unit); andd.the alleged amount of overpayment.2.Documentation  of  Payments.    Copies  of  all  receipts,  cancelled  checks,  or similar  documentation  available  to  the Petitionerto  establish  the  alleged payment and acceptance of unlawful Rent by the Landlord.3.Other  Occupants.    The  name(s)  and  contact  information  (current  address, e-mail  address,  and  telephone  number,  if  available)  of  each  person(s)  who lived  in  the  Rental  Unit  during  the  period(s)  in  which  unlawful  Rents  were accepted by the Landlord.4.Agreements.    A  copy  of  each  Rental  Housing  Agreement,  if  available,  and any  other  written  agreement  between  the  Landlord  and  Tenant(s)  related  to the  Rent  and/or  the  Rental  Unit  that  was  in  effect  during  the  period(s)  in which  unlawful  Rents  were  accepted  bythe  Landlord  (including  a  security deposit, finder’s fee, broker’s fee, or other agreement, or contract for services in lieu of all or a portion of Rent).  

5.Notices; Other Documents.  A copy of each notice altering the amount of Rent due  for  the  Rental Unit  and  any  other  document,  or  correspondence  that  is relevant to the Petition.If any of the documents identified in Subsections 1 through 6 of Section G exist but are  not  readily  available,  then  the Petitionermust  identify  the  document  to  the greatestextent  feasible  and  explain  why  the  document  cannot  be  obtained  by Petitionervia ordinary means.H.Petition Requirements: Rent IncreaseA  Petition  for  an  Individual  Rent  Adjustment  that  would  increase  Rent  must include:1.The requested Rent increasefor each Rental Unit;2.The proposed effective date of Rent increase;3.A description of the facilities on the property,including the number of Rental Units,  number  of  bedrooms  and  bathrooms  for  each  Rental  Unit,  and  an explanation of other relevant facilities and Housing Services;4.A description of the allocation of utility costs;5.The purchase date and purchase price;6.A Rent roll identifying current Rents received itemized by Unit;7.Documentation of Base Year and Current Year Operating Expenses, sorted by category,  and  labeled  in  order  to  enable  prompt  location  of  any  expense documents;8.Income and expense summaries for three (3) years preceding the Petition;9.A  description  and  documentation  of  property  tax  increases  or  decreases for three (3) years preceding the Petition;10.A    description    and    documentation    of    increases    and/or    decreases    in Maintenance Costs and Operating Expenses;11.The cost of planned or completed Capital Improvements to any Rental Unit to which  the  Petition applies,  but  only  where  such  Capital  Improvements  are necessary to bring the Property into compliance or maintain compliance with applicable  local  codes  affecting  health  and  safety,  and  where  such  Capital Improvement   costs   are   amortized   as   defined   under   the   CSFRA   and implementing Regulations;12.A  description  and  documentation  of  increases  or  decreases  in  the number  of tenants  occupying  the  Rental  Unit  and  receiving  Housing  Services  to  which the Petition applies;13.A  description  and  documentation  of  any  substantial  deterioration  of  the Rental Unit other than that resulting from normal wear and tear;14.Confirmation  that  the  Landlord  provides  adequate  Housing  Services,  and substantially   complies   with   applicable State   rental   housing   laws,   local housing codes, health and safety codes, and the Rental Housing Agreement; 15.A  description  of  Rent  increases  or  decreases  per  Rental  Unit  during  the occupancy  of  the  current  Tenant  for  each  Rental  Unit  to  which  the  Petition applies; and16.Any  additional  explanation  relevant  to  justify  the  Petition  (including  any expert documentation prepared in support of the Petition). I.Petitioner Notice of SubmissionUpon  submitting  a  Petition  to  the  Rental  Housing  Committee  or  its  designee,  the Petitioner must providea copy of the Petition form described in Section C and an informational  notice  form  produced  by  the  Rental  Housing  Committee  to  any party that may oppose a Petition (e.g.,a Landlord must provide notice to a Tenant of each Rental Unit to which the Petition applies, and a Tenant must provide notice to a Landlord of the Rental Unit to which the Petition applies).J.Consolidation of PetitionsAt  the  sole  discretion  of  the  Rental  Housing  Committee,  or  its  designee,  any Petition  may  be  consolidated  with  any other  Petition  related  to  the:(1)  same Rental Unit;or (2) one or more other Rental Unit(s) located in the same structure as the Rental Unit.K.Petition Response1.Right   to   Respond.      A   party   to   a   Petition,   or   that   party’s   authorized representative, may submit a response to a Petition.  

2.Acceptance of Response.  The Rental Housing Committee or its designee will accept  one  response  from  each  party  to  a  Petition  entitled  to  respond  if received   within   twenty   (20)   days   of   a   Petition   for   an   Individual   Rent Adjustment  that  would  reduce  Rent,  or  within  thirty  (30)  days  of  a  Petition for  an  Individual  Rent  Adjustment  that  would  increase  Rent.    All  other responses  will  be  accepted  at  the  sole  discretion  of  the  Rental  Housing Committee, or its designee.  3.Failure  to  Respond.    A  failure  to  respond  by  a  party  to  a  Petition  does  not waive that party’s right to appear and present evidence at a hearing before a Hearing Officer or the Rental Housing Committee.  4.Landlord  Acknowledgement  and  Correction  of  Condition.    If  a  Landlord responds  to  a  Petition  for  an  Individual  Rent  Adjustment  that  would  reduce Rent with: a.an   affirmative   acknowledgement   of   the   condition   underlying   the Petition   (e.g.,inhabitable   premises,   reduced   Housing   Services   or maintenance, or receipt of unlawful rents);b.proof  of   correction   of   the   underlying   condition   (e.g.,correction   of condition or return of unlawful rent); and c.compensation for period of underlying condition, if applicable;then the Rental  Housing  Committee  or  itsdesignee  may  dismiss  the  Petition upon verification of items a.through c., as applicable, by the Petitioner.L.Acceptance of Petition for Upward Rent AdjustmentThe  Rental  Housing  Committee  cannot  accept  a  Petition  for  Individual  Rent Adjustment to increase Rent in any of the following circumstances:1.The Property is not registered with the Rental Housing Committee.2.A Rental Housing Fee or penalty for the Property is due and owing.3.The submitted Petition is incomplete or lacks required documentation.4.The  Property  is  subject  to  an  uncorrected  citation  or  notice  of  a  violation  of any  State  or  local  housing,  health,  or  safety  laws  as  issued  by  a  government official or agency.  

5.A  previously  filed  Petition  involving  the  same  Rental  Unit  or  Property  is presently pending before a Hearing Officer or the Rental Housing Committee.  In  this  instance,  the Petitionermay  amend  a  previously  accepted  Petition  so long  as  the  amendment  to  the  Petition  includes  a  request  for  an  extension  of any applicable time limits to review the original Petition. 6.A  Petition  for  Individual  Rent  Adjustment  involving  the  same  Rental  Unit was  accepted  and  adjudicated  within  twelve  (12)  months  of  the  submission, unless the result of the adjudication is described in Section M.7.A final Rental Housing Committee decision on a Petition for Individual Rent Adjustment  is  currently  pending  before  a  court  of  competent  jurisdiction, unless   the   result   of   adjudication   by   the   Rental   Housing   Committee   or Hearing Officer is described in Section M.The  Rental  Housing  Committee  or  its  designee  will  notify Petitionerin  writing within  thirty  (30)  days  of  filing  the  petition  if  the  Petition  is  not  accepted  and provide   an   explanation   why   the   Petition   was   not   accepted,   including   an explanation  of  any  information  and/or  documentation  needed  to  complete  the petition.M.Acceptance of Petitions: Dismissal ProhibitedNotwithstanding   any   other   provision   of   these   Regulations,   a   Petition   for Individual Rent Adjustment petition will not be dismissed if any of the following circumstances exists:1.The grounds upon which the Petitionerseeks an Individual Rent Adjustment could not have been raised at the prior hearing;2.Currently  available  evidence  that  supports  an  Individual  Rent  Adjustment was not available for good reason at the time of a prior hearing;3.An  Individual  Rent  Adjustment  was  not  sought  and  could  not  have  applied to the particular Rental Unit(s) to which the Petition applies; or 4.The Rental Housing Committee or its designee has explicitly stated in a prior written decision that the prohibition against filing a Petition within 12 months of adjudication will not apply to the Petitioner.  

N.Prehearing Settlement Conference1.Prior  to  a  hearing  regarding  a  Petition  for an  Individual  Rent  Adjustment,  a mandatory   prehearing   settlement   conference   may   be   scheduled   with   a Settlement Conference Facilitator at the sole discretion of the Rental Housing Committee or Hearing Officer.  2.Failure  of  a  Petitioner  to  participate  inthe  prehearing  settlement  conference will   bar   the   matter   from   proceeding   to   hearing.      The   purpose   of   the settlement conference is to provide an expeditious mechanism for the parties to   resolve   their   differences   informally,   with   the   assistance   of   a   skilledintermediary.3.No  record  shall  be  made  of  any  act,  statement,  or  occurrence  during  the prehearing settlement conference.4.Any  settlement  agreement  entered  into  through  the  prehearing  settlement conference  will  be  a  private  record  not  subject  to  public  disclosure.   [This incentivizes  the  prehearing  settlement  conference  and  is  a  reasonable interpretation  of  CSFRA  §§1711(e)  and  (g)  because  this  is  explicitly  not  a part of the hearing process.]5.If the parties fail to reach an agreement on any issueunderlying a Petition for Individual  Rent  Adjustment,  the  unresolved  underlying  issue(s)  will  be  set for hearing.O.Summary of Petition Processing1.To the extent feasible, each Petition for Individual Rent Adjustment accepted by  the  Rental  Housing Committee  or  its  designee  will  be  processed  and responses will be accepted in accordance with the following schedule.  




***
Last updated on 6/30/2017  